<<<PAGE 1>>>
i 
 
 
Treatment Guidelines for Antimicrobial Use in 
Common Syndromes 
2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi, India

<<<PAGE 2>>>
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICMR, New Delhi 
Treatment Guidelines for Antimicrobial Use in Common Syndromes. 2nd edition. 
© Indian Council of Medical Research 2019 All rights reserved 
 
Publications of the ICMR can be obtained from ICMR-HQ, 
Indian Council of Medical Research 
Division of ECD, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, India 
 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate ICMR publications – whether for sale 
or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to ICMR-Hq at the above 
address. 
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do 
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the ICMR 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or 
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of specific 
companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed 
or recommended by the ICMR in preference to others of a similar nature that are not 
mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are 
distinguished by initial capital letters. All reasonable precautions have been taken by 
the ICMR to verify the information contained in this publication. However, the 
published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed 
or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the 
reader. In no event shall ICMR be liable for damages arising from its use. 
The named authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this publication. 
Prnte in India

<<<PAGE 3>>>
ii 
 
 
 
 
 
FOREWORD 
 
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a serious global concern. The incidence rate of 
AMR is gradually rising in many pathogens that threaten our ability to treat and cure 
common infections. Irrational use of antibiotics, unregulated over the counter sale of 
antibiotics and lack of guidance and awareness on antibiotic use are major drivers of 
AMR incidences. Lack of monitoring and inappropriate use of antimicrobials is a major 
contributor for the development of AMR and its spread. 
 
In recognition of this growing problem, ICMR developed evidence based 
treatment guidelines for treatment of common syndromes in 2017. The second edition 
reflects the updated information on guidelines for treatment of bone and joint infections, 
skin & soft tissue and central nervous system infections with their dosing, route of 
administration and duration of therapy. We gratefully acknowledges the infectious 
disease physicians and clinical microbiologists who contributed to the compilation of this 
document. 
 
We hope that this document will serve as a practical guide for the health care 
professionals in guiding the treatment and proper usage of antimicrobials. This document 
will benefit in prescribing and dispensing antimicrobials effectively thus improving the 
quality of patient care and bringing down the AMR burden in the country. 
 
 
 
Prof. Balram Bhargava 
Secretary, DHR & Director General, ICMR

<<<PAGE 4>>>
iii 
 
Instructions to Users of Antimicrobial Guidelines 
 _____________________________________________________________________ 
The “Treatment guidelines for antimicrobial use in common syndromes” aims to 
rationalize the usage of antibiotics on National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) and 
to establish consistency in the treatment of various infectious conditions. ICMR 
established AMR surveillance network in 2012 to collect nationally representative data 
on trends and patterns of AMR to the commonly used antibiotics in pathogens of public 
health importance. The data emanating from this network has been used to guide the 
treatment of various syndromes. 
The country’s leading infectious disease physicians and clinical microbiologists from 
leading medical organizations have contributed to this compilation. All recommended 
therapies are either evidence-based as per universally accepted standards. These are 
general guidelines; treatment of individual patients may vary depending upon local 
conditions and experience. The antimicrobial susceptibility data given in this guideline 
are from selected leading tertiary care hospitals in India and does not represent the 
community data. Antimicrobial resistance data is known to differ between different 
healthcare institutes and between different clinical departments of same institute. Hence 
each healthcare institute and each clinical department must customize their respective 
guideline accordingly using ICMR guideline as rational format. ICMR had brought out 
the first edition of the guideline in 2017. This guideline builds up on the first edition and 
has additional chapters on skin & soft tissue, bone & joint and CNS infections. 
 
 
Dr.Ram Gopalkrishnan 
Chairman, 
Formulation of Treatment 
Guidelines 
Consultant, 
Apollo Hospital, Chennai 
Dr V C Ohri 
 
Former Consultant AMR, 
Division of ECD, 
ICMR, New Delhi 
Dr Kamini Walia 
Scientist F, 
Program officer AMR, 
Division of ECD, 
ICMR, New Delhi

<<<PAGE 5>>>
iv 
 
CONTENTS 
 
S. No 
Title 
Page No. 
1. 
Introduction to Antibiotic Use 
1 
2. 
Management of Acute fever 
5 
3. 
Management of Sepsis 
29 
4. 
Management of Respiratory tract infections (RTI) & Community 
Acquired Pneumonia 
35 
5. 
Management of Intra-abdominal infections 
45 
6. 
Management of Skin and Soft Tissue Infections 
55 
7. 
Management of Bone and Joint Infections 
61 
8. 
Management of CNS Infections 
75 
9. 
Management of Urinary Tract Infections (UTI) 
86 
10. 
Management of Hospital Acquired Infection (HAI) 
93 
11. 
Infections in Immunocompromised host 
126 
12. 
Management of Pelvic infections 
142 
13. 
Management of Infective Endocarditis 
154 
14. 
Tables on duration, drug interaction, dosage and administration 
164 
15. 
Appendix I- ICMR data 2018 
183 
16. 
Appendix II- Index of Tables 
198

<<<PAGE 6>>>
1 
 
CHAPTER: 1 
Introduction To Antibiotic Use 
1.1 Introduction 
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a global threat today and has overshadowed the 
potential gain in reducing deaths due to infections. It is estimated that by the year 2050, 
Asia will have 4.7 million deaths that could be directly attributed to AMR. Antimicrobial 
resistance is rampant in India with up to 12-59 % of E. coli being extended beta 
lactamase (ESBL) producers and up to 30% being carbapenemase producers (CP). 
Klebsiella pneumoniae has emerged over the last few years as a highly resistant pathogen 
with up to 50% resistance to carbapenems and rapidly increasing resistance to 
polymyxins. In addition, methicillin resistance in Staphylococcus aureus is seen in up to 
30% of S. aureus isolates nationally. It is well documented that antibiotic abuse is one of 
the major drivers of antibiotic resistance and thus optimising usage of antibiotics is the 
need of the hour. India is the largest consumer of antibiotics in the world i.e., 13 billion 
standard units in 2010 and from 2000 to 2010 the per capita consumption increased by 
66%. In May 2015, the World Health Assembly adopted a resolution to endorse a global 
action plan on antimicrobial resistance. 
 
1.1.1 The plan set out five objectives: 
- To improve awareness and understanding of antimicrobial resistance; To strengthen 
surveillance and research; To reduce the incidence of infection; 
- To optimise the use of antimicrobials 
- To ensure sustainable investment in countering antimicrobial resistance. 
In India antibiotics are prescribed by physicians irrationally, dispensed over the counters 
without a prescription and used in livestock and poultry as growth enhancers. Hence a 
concerted effort at all levels is required to prevent transmission of antimicrobial 
resistance. 
The strategic objectives of the Indian National Action Plan –Antimicrobial resistance 
(NAP-AMR) are aligned to the Sustained Developmental goals (SDGs) and the Global 
action plan on antimicrobial resistance adopted by the World Health Assembly in 2015. 
The main objectives put forth by the World Health Assembly were adopted and in 
addition, a 6th priority was identified –strengthening India’s leadership on AMR. 
 
1.1.2 Principles of rational antibiotic use 
Human antimicrobial misuse or overuse is one of the main drivers of AMR and in the 
presence of a dry antibiotic pipeline, it becomes imperative that we learn to use 
antibiotics judiciously and responsibly. In 2010, India was adjudicated to be the world’s 
largest consumer of antibiotics and hence curbing injudicious use of antibiotics is a must.

<<<PAGE 7>>>
2 
 
Antibiotic abuse happens due to common fallacies such as a belief that broad spectrum 
antibiotics are “safer” and failure to distinguish between bacterial infections and non-
bacterial infections and non-infectious syndromes. In addition, antibiotics for durations 
longer than necessary, redundant cover (like double gram negative or double anaerobic 
over) or treatment of colonizers or contaminants also constitute inappropriate antibiotic 
use. A stewardship program implementing rational antibiotic use is mandatory to curb 
irrational antibiotic use. 
Antimicrobial stewardship is defined as a set of coordinated interventions designed to 
measure and improve the appropriate use of antibiotics by promoting the selection of the 
optimal choice, dose, duration and route of the antibiotic which in turn lead to improved 
patient outcomes and decreased adverse effects. 
1.1.3 Steps of rational antibiotic use 
Step 1: Making a clinical diagnosis is often not given enough importance leading us to 
most often stumble upon a diagnosis while sending multiple lab tests. A clinical diagnosis 
most often helps us to predict causative pathogens fitting in to a clinical syndrome which 
would tailor the correct antibiotic rather than blindly relying on fever, procalcitonin 
levels, WBC counts, cultures or radiology to make a diagnosis of infection. Our thought 
process here should be 
Diagnosis of infection 
- Is it an infection? 
- A risk assessment of how likely is it that the patient has an infection? 
- What are the possible non-infectious mimics? 
- Have we taken the appropriate cultures to confirm the final diagnosis? 
Step 2: Limiting empiric antibiotic therapy to genuine seriously ill patients. Generally, 
empiric antibiotic therapy is ONLY recommended for a select group of patients as 
described below after taking appropriate cultures 
- 
Febrile neutropenia 
- 
Severe sepsis and septic shock 
- 
Community acquired pneumonia 
- 
Ventilator associated pneumonia 
- 
Necrotizing fasciitis 
Hence, it is important to start smart and then focus, i.e., evaluate if empiric therapy can be 
justified or de-escalated and then make a plan with regard to the duration of therapy. 
 
Step 3: Know your bugs 
 
Approach includes 
- 
Identify the clinical syndrome 
- 
Elucidate possible sources of infection

<<<PAGE 8>>>
3 
 
- 
Predict possible microbial pathogens 
- 
Predict the local resistance pattern based on institutional antibiogram 
 
Step 4: Choose the appropriate antibiotic 
- 
Based on the spectrum of the antibiotic taking into account possible resistant patterns 
- 
Use the correct dose, route and duration 
- 
Ensure chosen antibiotic has adequate tissue penetration at the site of infection 
- 
Optimize PK-PD parameters according to co-morbidities 
 
Step 5: De-escalation/modification 
- 
Modify empiric broad spectrum antibiotics depending on culture and antimicrobial 
susceptibility reports and patient status 
- 
Stop polymyxins and glycopeptides if no carbapenem resistant organisms (CRO) or 
methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) identified on cultures 
- 
Avoid double or redundant gram negative or anaerobic coverage 
- 
Discontinue antibiotics if a non-infectious mimic identified 
- 
De-escalate combination therapy to a single agent 
- 
Change a broad spectrum antibiotic to a narrow spectrum one 
- 
Change IV to oral antibiotics 
De-escalation is safe in all patients including febrile neutropenia and septic shock and 
reduces mortality and length of hospital stay. 
 
Step 6: Stop antibiotics in the following clinical situations 
I. Respiratory tract syndromes 
- Viral pharyngitis 
- Viral rhinosinusitis 
- Viral bronchitis 
 - Non-infectious cardio-pulmonary syndromes misdiagnosed as pneumonia 
 
II. Skin and Soft Tissue Infections 
 - Subcutaneous abscesses 
 - Lower extremity stasis dermatitis 
 
III. Asymptomatic bacteriuria and pyuria including in catheterized patients 
 
 
IV. Microbial colonization and culture contamination 
 
V. Low grade fever 
 
Step 7: Reduce the duration of therapy 
Duration of therapy should be optimized to minimum possible to reduce selection 
pressure. Practice guidelines and recommendations for optimum duration of therapy for 
various infectious disease syndromes suggest the following durations: 
Community acquired pneumonia: 5 days

<<<PAGE 9>>>
4 
 
Hospital acquired pneumonia: 8 days 
Skin and Soft tissue infections: 5 days 
Urinary tract infections 
- cystitis: 3-5 days 
- Pyelonephritis: 5-14 days 
- Catheter associated: 7 days 
- Staphylococcal aureus bacteraemia – low risk of complications = 2 weeks 
 - high risk of complications = 4-6 weeks 
 
Intra-abdominal infection: 4-7 days 
 
Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis: 1 dose 
 
A stop date should be planned and recorded in advance to ensure antibiotic is not given 
beyond the recommended duration. 
 
Step 8: Optimize PK-PD parameters 
We cannot influence how a drug gets metabolized but we can influence drug 
administration for maximum efficacy. Age and co-morbidities like renal failure, sepsis 
and burns also influence the outcomes of the patients. Overall, exposure of the infective 
agent to the unbound antibiotic drug fraction at the relevant effect site seems to be the 
most important factor. Optimizing Pk-PD parameters include loading doses when needed, 
therapeutic drug monitoring for toxicity and efficacy and optimization of drug infusion or 
administration. For e.g., 
- 
Loading dose of Colistin 9 million units stat and then followed by 3 million units 
Q8H or 4.5 million units Q12H [to target Colistin Average Steady State Plasma 
Concentration (Css,avg = 2-2.5 mg/L) 
- 
Inj vancomycin 1g IV Q12H and dose to be adjusted to maintain a trough level 
between 15-20 µg/ml [however there are increasing recent data that suggests that 
AUC/MIC may be a better indicator of clinical efficacy than a trough level] 
- 
Extended infusion of  lactams 
Conclusion 
Antimicrobial stewardship is a pressing need and is the only proven strategy to prevent 
human antimicrobial over use and abuse which is one of the main drivers of antimicrobial 
resistance. Rational use of antibiotics needs to be taught at all levels in the medical school 
curriculum. 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. Dr. Priscilla 
 Professor of Infectious Diseases, 
 Christian Medical College, 
Vellore, India

<<<PAGE 10>>>
5 
 
CHAPTER: 2 
Management of Acute Fever 
2.1 Management of community-onset acute undifferentiated fever in adults 
 
2.1.1 Outline 
The purpose of the guidelines is to ensure appropriate antimicrobial treatment while at 
the same time limiting the inappropriate use of antibiotics in the management of 
infections by addressing issues like antibiotic selection, dosing, route, duration, adverse 
drug events, and cost and prevention of unintended collateral damage. 
 
2.1.2 Some general principles 
 Antibiotic use will need to be classified with respect to type (high- and low-risk) 
and the patient’s place in the treatment pathway (untreated, treated, and post-
treatment). 
 The choice of medication may vary depending on differences in the case mix of 
patients, various drugs (of same or different class) listed in the formulary or clinical 
practice guidelines already in place at different institutions in similar patient care 
locations. 
 Timely use of diagnostic tests or documentation of symptoms supporting the 
presence of infection would be best. Cultures (two sets of blood cultures and other 
appropriate samples as clinically indicated e.g. normally sterile body fluids, deep 
pus etc.) should be taken before starting empiric antibiotic treatment. 
 Empiric antibiotic treatment for common infections should be limited to conditions 
where early initiation of antibiotics has been shown to be beneficial, e.g. severe 
sepsis and septic shock, acute bacterial meningitis, community acquired 
pneumonia, necrotizing fasciitis, etc. 
 Re-assessment of the situation within 48 hours based on the test results and 
examination of the patient is required. If needed, the drug's dosage and duration can 
be adjusted or the antibiotic regimen should be de-escalated (to the narrowest 
spectrum, least toxic and least expensive antibiotic) based upon patient response 
and culture and susceptibility reports. 
 
2.1.3 Case Definition 
 Previously healthy (non-immunosuppressed) community (urban or rural) dwelling 
adult (ages 19-64 yrs.) reporting no previous medical illness or recent 
hospitalization (in the preceding 30 days) presenting with acute onset of fever > 
38.3° C (101.0° F) for >2 days and lasting up to 14 days and having received no 
specific treatment for this current illness with antimalarials or antibiotics.

<<<PAGE 11>>>
6 
 
 Seen in ambulatory care settings at the primary level (PHC), doctor’s office/clinic, 
an emergency room in a Community Hospital, including referrals from primary 
health care or community physicians. 
 With history of no localizing symptoms (except accompaniments of fever such as – 
chills, headaches, retro-orbital pain, myalgia, malaise, nausea or vomiting). On 
examination found to have normal vital signs (excepting fever) and lacking organ 
or system specific physical signs*. 
* A complete and thorough physical examination is mandatory. Record of vital signs is 
essential. A search is required for hidden foci such as throat examination, sinus 
tenderness, renal or hepatic tenderness, heart murmurs, chest examination, lymph nodes 
and splenomegaly. Fundus examination (if headache or bleeding tendency) and 
examination of the skin for eschar and petechiae or purpura must be made. 
 
2.1.4 Common pathogens causing “tropical fevers”, “seasonal fevers” “endemic 
/epidemic /outbreak fever”, “monsoon fever”: 
 Suspect malaria in all cases of acute undifferentiated fever (there are no key 
differentiating features between this and other causes (see below). Despite historical 
claims, fever patterns are not especially helpful in establishing a specific diagnosis. 
Malaria is especially to be suspected after a visit to high malaria endemic zone. 
 Viruses cause febrile illness or specific viral “influenza-like- illness” (with mild 
sore throat and cough). 
 If rash or exanthem is present without drug exposure (rule out drug allergy), 
consider mononucleosis syndrome (EBV, CMV, HIV) or an exanthematous viral 
illness (measles, rubella, etc). 
 Primary or secondary dengue may be accompanied by maculo-papular rash or 
polyarthralgia. Tourniquet test may be inappropriate as a general discriminating test 
without hemorrhagic manifestations or the shock syndrome. Consider hemorrhagic 
fever with two or more hemorrhagic symptoms - hemorrhagic or purpuric rash, 
epistaxis, conjunctival haemorrhage, bleeding gums, bleeding at puncture sites, 
hematuria, hematemesis, hemoptysis, blood in the stool. 
 Scrub typhus or murine typhus may present with skin eschar, regional 
lymphadenopathy, and maculopapular rash. 
 Leptospirosis can present with conjunctival suffusion, muscle tenderness and 
jaundice (ask for flood water or sewage exposure). 
 Typhoid should be suspected in the presence of continuous fever, gastro intestinal 
symptoms and splenomegaly. 
 Community acquired secondary bacteremia: Primary source may be occult. In most 
instances, it is either from underlying pneumonia, intra-abdominal infection or 
urosepsis. Symptoms related to these systems may not be manifest, especially in the 
elderly.

<<<PAGE 12>>>
7 
 
 Hepatitis A or E can cause fever that usually subsides with the onset of jaundice. 
 Chikungunya presents with fever and polyarthralgia /polyarthritis. 
 Consider rheumatic fever caused by Group A beta hemolytic streptococci if there is 
migratory arthritis with preceding significant sore throat. 
 Tuberculosis should be considered in any patient with prolonged undifferentiated 
fever, especially if there is weight loss. 
 
2.1.5 Diagnostic Investigations (where facilities are available) 
 One blood smear and/or RDT at least is required for malarial parasite detection 
(repeat blood smear once more if the initial smear is negative in an endemic 
region). 
 Complete blood count:Anemia, leucopenia /leukocytosis, elevated hematocrit or 
thrombocytopenia are all helpful in diagnosis. 
 Diagnostic blood cultures (at least two sets) are to be drawn prior to the start of 
empiric antibiotics. 
 Liver enzymes and bilirubin 
 Urinalysis – white blood cells, proteinuria and hematuria. 
 Chest roentgenogram (if chest findings are present, to rule out early pneumonia or 
TB) 
 Ultrasonography of abdomen if fever persists to rule out hepatic, renal or 
intraabdominal sources of infection. 
 Within 96 hours of onset of fever, antigen based serological tests are likely to be 
positive whereas antibody tests are generally positive after at least 5-7 days of 
illness. 
a. Dengue rapid NS1 antigen 
b. IgM ELISA for Dengue, Scrub typhus and Leptospira 
 
2.1.6 Prevalent AMR status in common pathogens 
Malaria: P. vivax is susceptible to chloroquine which remains the drug of choice. P. 
falciparum resistance to chloroquine is seen in at least 25% of cases nationwide, and 
therefore artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACT) should be the first line 
treatment for P. falciparum malaria and where species is unclear. Artemisinin (especially 
oral) monotherapy should be strongly discouraged as it leads to resistance to this class. 
 
Typhoid fever: Quinolone resistance is increasing and is as high as 69% for Salmonella 
Typhi and 23% for Salmonella Paratyphi A. Resistance rates are low for co-trimoxazole, 
chloramphenicol and third generation cephalosporins. Though sensitivity testing is not 
validated for azithromycin, the response is good in most clinical studies. However,

<<<PAGE 13>>>
8 
 
defervescence times are significantly longer with third generation cephalosporins 
compared with other classes and bone marrow depression is a concern with 
chloramphenicol. 
Gram negative organisms: There is increasing resistance among Enterobacteriaceae 
(E. coli and Klebsiella) to both quinolones (up to 80%) and third generation 
cephalosporins (up to 75% on account of ESBL production). Initial empiric therapy for 
infections caused by these organisms {pyelonephritis, severe intraabdominal infections 
(IAI), etc} should be with an agent active against ESBL producers e.g.a carbapenem or 
with a beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor forless severely ill patients. 
Gram positive organisms: Community acquired organisms such as S. aureus are 
usually susceptible to methicillin i.e. standard anti staphylococcal drugs such as 
cloxacillin and first cephalosporins may be used. Penicillin still remains the drug of 
choice for pneumococcal infection. 
 
2.1.7 Principles of empiric therapy 
a. 
Supportive: Acetaminophen 650 mg every 6 hours round the clock is advisable, 
accompanied by tepid sponging for fever >1030 F. Replace fluid and electrolytes as 
required. 
b. No antibiotics are required for the majority of patients with acute febrile illness 
without an obvious clinical diagnosis. 
c. 
Start antibiotics for a presumed bacterial infection promptly, but adjust the drug's 
dosage and duration, switch to a new drug, or end antibiotic therapy when results 
do not support or justify the need to continue. 
d. Reassess the situation within 48 hours based on test results and patient status. 
e. 
Corticosteroids are not recommended in the treatment of acute undifferentiated 
fever. 
f. 
In patients with fever and thrombocytopenia, platelet transfusions are not 
recommended in general. 
g. Consider platelet transfusion when platelet counts are <10,000 cu mm or in the 
presence of clinical bleeding in cases of dengue hemorrhagic fever. 
h. Empirical treatment with doxycycline for patients with undifferentiated fever and 
negative rapid diagnostic tests for malaria and dengue is an option for the clinician.

<<<PAGE 14>>>
9 
 
Protocol for the management of adult patients with acute undifferentiated fever 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIRS / Sepsis 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Day 1 or 2: Defer investigation and anti-microbials 
B. Day 3 or 4: Total leukocyte count with differential, Malaria parasite slide and 
rapid diagnostic kits, may test for Dengue if suspicion high. 
C. > 5 days: As per (B) plus paired blood cultures. May test for Dengue, 
Chikungunya, Scrub typhus, Leptospirosis if suspicion high. 
D. > 7 days: As per (C) plus X-ray chest and USG abdomen 
 
Table 2.1: Antimicrobial choice for disease conditions 
S. 
No 
Type 
of 
disease 
 
Organisms 
 
Initial 
Treatment/ 
Preferred 
Alternatives 
Comments 
 
Comments 
1 
Typhoid fever 
Salmonella Typhi, 
Salmonella 
Paratyphi A 
 
Oral: cotrimoxazole 
or 
azithromycin 
Parenteral: ceftriaxone 
Cefixime 
or 
chloramphenicol or 
ciprofloxacin 
Change 
the 
empiric 
regimen 
based 
on 
susceptibility 
testing. Duration 
of treatment: 10-
14 days. 
2 
Empiric 
therapy 
of 
suspected 
Gram positive 
infections 
 
S. 
pneumoniae, 
Streptococcus 
pyogenes, 
S. aureus 
 
Cefazolin 
or 
Cloxacillin 
 
Amoxicillin 
clavulanate 
or 
Vancomycin 
(if 
anaphylactic 
penicillin allergy or 
MRSA 
clinically 
possible) 
Adjust 
regimen 
after receipt of 
culture 
and 
susceptibility 
data. 
 
Fever > = 100 oF 
For < 14 day
Clinical features suggesting severity 
- Altered sensorium 
- Hypotension: SBP < 90 mm Hg 
- Tachypnoea: RR > 24/ min 
Clinical features suggesting localization 
- Cough, Dyspnea: Respiratory diseases 
- Headache, Seizures, Stiff neck: CNS diseases 
- Dysuria, Hematuria: Urinary diseases 
- Abdominal pain, Diarrhea, vomiting: GI diseases 
- Abscess, furuncles, cellulitis: Skin & soft tissue 
infection 
- Fever with rash: Exanthematous fever 
Hospitalization (Sepsis algorithm) 
Acute undifferentiated Fever
Rule 
out 
Rule 
out

<<<PAGE 15>>>
10 
 
3 
Empiric 
therapy 
for 
suspected 
Gram negative 
infections (e.g. 
pyelonephritis 
or 
intra-
abdominal 
infections) 
 
E. coli, Klebsiella 
pneumoniae, 
anaerobes 
especially 
Bacteroides sp in 
IAI 
 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or 
Cefoperazone 
-
sulbactam 
Imipenem 
or 
Meropenem 
or 
Ertapenem 
(carbapenems 
preferred for more 
seriously 
ill 
patients) 
 
Separate 
anaerobic 
coverage 
unnecessary 
for 
IAI, when using 
BL-BLIs 
 
or 
carbapenems. De-
escalate 
to 
ciprofloxacin, 
cotrimoxazole or 
third 
generation 
cephalosporin 
if 
the 
isolate 
is 
sensitive. 
4 
Rickettsial 
infections 
Orientia 
tsutsugamushi,Ric
kettsia conorii, 
R. typhi 
Doxycycline 
 
Azithromycin 
chloramphenicol 
Duration 
of 
treatment: 7 days 
 
5 
Leptospirosis 
Leptospira sp 
Penicillin 
G 
or 
doxycycline 
 
Ceftriaxone 
Duration 
of 
treatment: 7 days 
 
6 
Vivax malaria 
P. vivax 
Oral Chloroquine 
 
Artemether-
lumefantrine 
 
Followed 
by 
primaquine 
7 
Falciparum 
malaria 
P. falciparum 
If the patient is able to 
take orally: 
Except 
for 
North 
eastern states: 
Oral Artesunate and 
Pyrimethamine on the 
first day. 
In Northeastern states: 
Artemether-
Lumefantrine 
should 
be used. 
If the patient is unable 
to take orally: 
IV Artesunate. Switch 
over to oral therapy 
when 
as 
soon 
as 
possible. Add a second 
agent 
such 
as 
doxycycline 
or 
clindamycin 
Artemether-
lumefantrine 
 
Followed 
by 
primaquine single 
dose. All mixed 
infections should 
be treated with 
full 
course 
of 
ACT 
and 
primaquine 
0.25 
mg per kg daily 
for 14 days. 
 
* All these regimens need to be tailored according to susceptibility patterns at 
individual centres.

<<<PAGE 16>>>
11 
 
Table 2.2: Standard doses of antimicrobials 
Antibiotics 
Doses, duration and route of administration 
Cotrimoxazole 
1 DS tab bd 
Azithromycin 
20 mg/kg/day) 
Ceftriaxone 
2 g IV od 
Cefixime 
20 mg/kg/day 
Chloramphenicol 
 500 mg qid 
Ciprofloxacin 
750 mg bd 
Cefazolin 
2 g IV q8h 
Cloxacillin 
2 g IV q6h 
Amoxicillin clavulanate 
1.2 g IV q8h 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
4.5 g IV q6h 
Cefoperazone -sulbactam 
3 g IV q12h 
Imipenem 
1 g IV q8h 
Meropenem 
1 g IV q8h 
Ertapenem 
1 g IV od 
Doxycycline 
100 mg PO or IV bd 
Azithromycin 
500 mg PO or IV od 
Penicillin G 
20 laks IV q4h 
Oral Chloroquine 
25 mg/kg body weight divided over three days i.e. 10 
mg/kg on day 1, 10 mg/kg on day 2 and 5 mg/kg on day 3. 
Artemether-lumefantrine 
1 tab bd for 3 days 
Primaquine 
(For 
vivax 
malaria) 
0.25 mg/kg daily for 14 days 
Primaquine (for falciparum 
malaria) 
0.75 mg/kg single dose 
Oral Artesunate 
4mg/kg for 3 days plus sulfadoxine (25 mg/kg body 
weight) 
Pyrimethamine 
1.25 mg/kg body weight) on the first day 
Artesunate 
IV 4.2 mg/kg at 0 hr, 12 hr followed by every 24 hourly 
 
References 
1. MayfongMayxay, Josée Castonguay-Vanier, ViladaChansamouth et al (2013). Causes of non-
malarial fever in Laos: a prospective study. Lancet Glob Health. 1(3):e46-e54. 
2. Sudhagar Thangarasu, Prithviraj Natarajan, ParivalavanRajavelu, Arjun Rajagopalan, Jeremy 
S SeelingerDevey (2011). A protocol for the emergency department management of acute 
undifferentiated febrile illness in India. Int J Emerg Med 4: 57 
3. M Rahi, MD Gupte, A Bhargava, GM Varghese, R Arora (2015). DHR-ICMR guidelines for 
diagnosis and management of rickettsial diseases in India. Ind J Med Res 141:417-22. 
4. V D’Acremont, M Kilowoko, et al (2014). Beyond malaria- causes of fever in outpatient 
Tanzanian children. N Engl J Med 370:809-817.

<<<PAGE 17>>>
12 
 
5. A Chowdhary, R Gopalakrishnan, S Nambi, V Ramasubramanian et al (2013). Antimicrobial 
susceptibility of Salmonella enteric serovars in a tertiary care hospital in South India. Ind J 
Med Res 137:800-802. 
6. Naman K Shah, Gajender PS Dhillon, Aditya P Dash, Usha Arora, Steven R Meshnick, 
NeenaValecha (2011).The Lancet Infectious Diseases 11 (1) :57–64. 
7. Robinson ML, Manabe YC (2017). Reducing uncertainty for acute febrile illness in resource-
limited settings: the current diagnostic landscape. The American journal of tropical medicine 
and hygiene 96(6):1285-95. 
8. Morch K, Manoharan A, Chandy S, Chacko N, Alvarez-Uria G, Patil S, Henry A, Nesaraj J, 
Kuriakose C, Singh A, Kurian S (2017). Acute undifferentiated fever in India: a multicentre 
study of aetiology and diagnostic accuracy. BMC infectious diseases17(1):665. 
 
2.2 Malaria 
Around 2 million laboratories confirmed cases of malaria are reported in the country 
annually of which 40-50% are P. falciparum, which may lead to complications in 0.5% to 
2% of cases and mortality in about 30% of such cases if timely treatment is not given. All 
malaria should be treated after confirmation only, with the exception of an initial dose of 
antimalarial till the smear report is ready. 
 
2.2.1 Treatment of uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria 
The five artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACTs) recommended for treatment of 
uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria are: 
(a) artemether + lumefantrine 
(b) artesunate + amodiaquine 
(c) artesunate + mefloquine 
(d) artesunate + SP 
(e) dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine 
 
 ACT regimens should provide 3 days treatment with an artemisinin-derivative.

<<<PAGE 18>>>
13 
 
Table 2.3: ACT regimens as per body weight 
 
Body weight (kg) 
 
Artemether + lumefantrine dose (mg) given twice daily for 
3 days 
5 to < 15 
20 + 120 
15 to < 25 
40 + 240 
25 to < 35 
60 + 360 
= 35 
80 + 480 
Body weight (kg) 
Artesunate + amodiaquine dose (mg) given daily for 3 days 
4.5 to < 9 
25 + 67.5 
9 to < 18 
50 + 135 
18 to < 36 
100 + 270 
= 36 
200 + 540 
Body weight (kg) 
Artesunate + mefloquine dose (mg) given daily for 3 days 
5 to < 9 
25 + 55 
9 to < 18 
50 + 110 
18 to < 30 
100 + 220 
= 30 
200 + 440 
Body weight (kg) 
Dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine dose (mg) given daily 
5 to < 8 
20 + 160 
8 to < 11 
30 + 240 
11 to < 17 
40 + 320 
17 to < 25 
60 + 480 
25 to < 36 
80 + 640 
36 to < 60 
120 + 960 
60 < 80 
160 + 1280 
>80 
200 + 1600 
 
Body weight 
Artesunate dose is given 
daily for 3 days (mg) 
Sulfadoxine/ 
pyrimethamine 
dose 
(mg) given as a singledose on day 1 
5 to < 10 
25 mg 
250 / 12.5 
10 to < 25 
50 mg 
500 / 25 
25 to < 50 
100 mg 
1000 / 50 
= 50 
200 mg 
1500 / 75 
 
The recommended second-line treatment is an alternative ACT known to be effective in 
the region. Recurrence of fever and parasitaemia > 4 weeks after treatment may be due to 
either recrudescence or a new infection. The distinction can be made only by PCR. As 
PCR is not routinely used in patient management, all presumed treatment failures after 4 
weeks of initial treatment should be considered new infections and be treated with the 
first-line ACT. However, reuse of mefloquine within 60 days of first treatment is 
associated with an increased risk for neuropsychiatric reactions, and an alternative ACT 
should be used.

<<<PAGE 19>>>
14 
 
2.2.2 Reducing the transmissibility of P. falciparum infections 
In low-transmission areas, give a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg body weight (BW) 
primaquine with ACT to patients with P. falciparum malaria (except pregnant women, 
infants aged < 6 months and women breastfeeding infants aged < 6 months) to reduce 
transmission. G6PD testing is not required. 
Table 2.4: Primaquine regimens as per body weight 
Body weight (kg) 
A single dose of primaquine (mg base) 
10a to < 25 
3.75 
25 to < 50 
7.5 
50 to 100 
15 
 
2.2.3 Treating uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in special risk groups 
a) The first trimester of pregnancy- Treat pregnant women with uncomplicated P. 
falciparum malaria during the first trimester with either ACTs (there is increasing 
evidence of safety in this population) or the conventional regimen of 7 days of 
quinine + clindamycin. 
b) Infants less than 5 kg body weight- Treat infants weighing < 5 kg with 
uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria with ACT at the same mg/kg body weight 
target dose as for children weighing 5 kg. 
c) Patients co-infected with HIV- In people who have HIV/AIDS and uncomplicated 
P. falciparum malaria, avoid artesunate + SP if they are also receiving co-
trimoxazole, and avoid artesunate + amodiaquine if they are also receiving 
efavirenz or zidovudine. 
d) Non-immune travelers- Treat travelers with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria 
returning to non endemic settings with an ACT. 
e) Uncomplicated hyperparasitaemia (People with P. falciparum hyperparasitaemia 
are at increased risk of treatment failure, severe malaria and death so should be 
closely monitored, in addition to receiving ACT. 
 
2.2.4 Treating uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria 
2.2.4.1 Blood stage infection- If the malaria species is not known with certainty, treat 
like uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria. In areas with chloroquine-susceptible 
infections, treat adults and children having uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae 
or P. knowlesi malaria with either ACT (except pregnant women in their first trimester) 
or chloroquine (Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence). 
 
2.2.4.2 In areas with chloroquine-resistant infections, treat adults and children having 
uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae or P. knowlesi malaria (except pregnant

<<<PAGE 20>>>
15 
 
women in their first trimester) with ACT. (Strong recommendation, high-quality 
evidence). Treat pregnant women in their first trimester who have chloroquine-resistant 
P. vivax malaria with quinine. 
 
2.2.4.3 Preventing relapse in P. vivax or P. ovale malaria- The G6PD status of patients 
should be used to guide administration of primaquine for preventing relapse. To prevent 
relapse, treat P. vivax or P. ovale malaria in children and adults (except pregnant women, 
infants aged < 6 months, women breastfeeding infants aged < 6 months, women 
breastfeeding older infants unless they are known no to be G6PD deficient, and people 
with G6PD deficiency) with a 14-day course (0.25-0.5 mg/kg bw daily) of primaquine in 
all transmission settings. 
 
2.2.4.4 In people with G6PD deficiency, consider preventing relapse by giving 
primaquine base at 0.75 mg/kg bw once a week for 8 weeks, with close medical 
supervision for potential primaquine-induced adverse haematological effects. When the 
G6PD status is unknown and G6PD testing is not available, a decision to prescribe 
primaquine must be based on an assessment of the risks and benefits of adding 
primaquine. Pregnant and breast feeding women- consider weekly chemoprophylaxis 
with chloroquine until delivery and breastfeeding are completed, then, on the basis of 
G6PD status, treat with primaquine to prevent future relapse (Conditional 
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). 
 
2.2.5 Treating severe Malaria 
Children: The signs and symptoms in children are a history of high fever, plus at least 
one of the following:- 
 
Prostration (inability to sit), altered consciousness lethargy or coma; 
 
Breathing difficulties; 
 
Severe anaemia; 
 
Convulsions; 
 
Inability to drink/ vomiting 
Patients with prostration and/or breathing difficulties should, if at all possible, be treated 
with parenteral antimalarials and antibiotics. If the clinical condition permits, other 
patients may be treated with oral antimalarials. 
 
Adults: The same symptoms and signs in children are valid for adults, with the addition 
of dark and/ or limited production of urine 
2.2.5.1 Who is at risk for severe complications? 
 In areas of low transmission – all age groups are vulnerable but adults develop 
more severe and multiple complications. The transmission pattern in most parts

<<<PAGE 21>>>
16 
 
of India is usually low, but the intense transmission is seen in north-eastern 
states and large areas of Orissa, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, and Madhya Pradesh. 
 In areas of high transmission – children below 5 years, visitors, migratory 
labours. 
 Association of pregnancy 
 
2.2.6 Treatment of severe and complicated malaria 
Semiconscious or comatose patients of severe P. falciparum infection should be treated 
with parenteral artemesinin based regimens. It is essential that full doses of effective 
parenteral (or rectal) antimalarial treatment be given promptly in the initial treatment of 
severe malaria. This should be followed by a full dose of effective ACT orally. Two 
classes of medicine are available for parenteral treatment of severe malaria: artemisinin 
derivatives (artesunate or artemether) and the cinchona alkaloids (quinine and quinidine). 
Parenteral artesunate is the treatment of choice for all severe malaria. There is substantial 
reduction in mortality with intravenous or intramuscular artesunate as compared with 
parenteral quinine. Artesunate is simpler, safer and reduces mortality significantly than 
quinine. 
 
The dose of artesunate is 2.4 mg/kg bw at 0, 12 and 24 hr. Then it is repeated once in 
every 24 hr. 
Treat adults and children who have severe malaria (including infants, pregnant women in 
all trimesters and lactating women) with intravenous or intramuscular artesunate for at 
least 24 h and until they can tolerate oral medication. Once a patient has received at least 
24 h of parenteral therapy and can tolerate oral therapy, complete treatment with 3 days 
of an ACT (add single dose primaquine in areas of low transmission). 
 
Note: Children weighing < 20 kg should receive a higher dose of artesunate (3 mg/kg bw 
per dose) than larger children and adults (2.4 mg/kg bw per dose) to ensure equivalent 
exposure to the drug. 
 
If parenteral artesunate is not available, use artemether in preference to quinine for 
treating children and adults with severe malaria. Artemether is two to three times less 
active than its main metabolite dihydroartemisinin. 
The initial dose of artemether is 3.2 mg/kg bw intramuscularly (to the anterior 
thigh). The maintenance dose is 1.6 mg/kg bw intramuscularly daily. 
This should be followed by a full dose of effective ACT orally. 
 
2.2.7 Chemoprophylaxis 
 Chemoprophylaxis is recommended for travelers, migrant labourers and military 
personnel exposed to malaria in highly endemic areas. Use of personal protection

<<<PAGE 22>>>
17 
 
measures like insecticide-treated bednets should be encouraged for pregnant women 
and other vulnerable populations. 
 For short-term chemoprophylaxis (less than 6 weeks):- Doxycycline- 100 mg daily 
in adults and 1.5 mg/kg for children more than 8 years old. The drug should be 
started 2 days before travel and continued for 4 weeks after leaving the malarious 
area. (Note: Doxycycline is contraindicated in pregnant women and children less 
than 8 years). 
 For long-term chemoprophylaxis (more than 6 weeks) Mefloquine: 5 mg/kg bw (up 
to 250 mg) weekly and should be administered two weeks before, during and four 
weeks after leaving the area. 
 
Table 2.5: Antimicrobials dosage as per chemoprophylaxis 
 
Chemoprophylaxis
Antimicrobial 
Dose duration 
Remark 
Short-term 
(less 
than 6 weeks 
Doxycycline 
 
Contraindicated 
in 
pregnant women and 
children < 8 years 
100 mg daily in 
adults and 1.5 
mg/kg 
for 
children 
>8 
years old. 
Started 
2 
days 
before 
travel 
and 
continued 
for 
4 
weeks after leaving 
the malarious area 
Long-term 
(More 
than 6 weeks 
Mefloquine* 
5 mg/kg bw 
(up to 250 mg) 
weekly 
Administered 
two 
weeks before, during 
and four weeks after 
leaving the area 
* Mefloquine is contraindicated in cases with history of convulsions, 
neuropsychiatric problems and cardiac conditions

<<<PAGE 23>>>
18 
 
Table 2.6: Standard doses of antimicrobials 
Name 
Mechanism of 
action 
Eliminati
on half 
Life 
Action 
Advantage 
Disadvantage 
Chloroquine 
 ? Inhibits 
plasmodial heme 
polymerase 
 Toxic drug-heme 
complex form 
 Dg. Intercalation 
of Pl. DNA 
 Intravacuolar pH 
alteration 
10 days 
 Schizonticidal 
for all species 
 Gametocidal for 
Pv. PO.PM. 
 No action on 
hypnozoites 
a) Highly potent 
against 
sensitive 
strains 
b)Long half life 
c)Effective at once 
a week dose as a 
prophylactic agent 
The rapid 
development of 
resistance 
Quinine 
(Same as 
Chloroquine) 
11 hrs. 
 Primary 
blood 
schizonticide 
 Little effect on 
sporozoite 
 Gametocidal to 
PV and PM 
The 
rapid 
development 
of 
resistance not yet 
seen 
Higher toxicity 
Artesunate / 
 
Artemether / 
 
Arteether 
 Activated by 
heme/ molecular 
iron to produce 
carbon centered 
free radicals 
 Membrane damage 
by free radical 
< 1 hr. 
3-11 hrs 
> 20 hrs. 
 Blood 
 schizonticide 
 Gametocidal 
action 
recently 
described 
a)Broader window 
period of 
effectiveness 
 
b)Little/ no cross 
resistance 
 
c)Resistance not 
yet recorded 
High recrudescence 
rate when used as 
monotherapy (10-
50%) when used 
for <5 days 
Mefloquine 
Formation of toxic 
subs. with heme 
 
20 days 
 Strong 
schnizonticidal 
action against 
all species. 
 Gametocidal l 
against PV, PM, 
PO 
 Sporonticidal 
act 
a)Useful as a 
prophylactic agent 
for non-immune 
travellers 
b)Single dose 
sufficient 
c) Good alt. To 
quinine in MDR Pf.
a)Only oral prep. 
available. 
 
So 
cannot be used in 
sev. Pf malaria 
b)High chances of 
cross-resistance, 
might 
lead 
to 
quinine resistance 
as well 
Halofantrine 
Concentrates and 
combines with ferri 
protop orphyrin IX, 
leading to memb. 
Damage1 
10-90 hrs. 
 Schizonticidal 
to all species 
 No action on 
latent tissue 
form of PV 
and 
gametocytes 
Good alternative to 
mefloquine/ 
quinine in 
chloroquine/ MDR 
Pf. 
a)Oral absorption 
erratic 
b)High chances of 
cross resistance 
with mefloquine 
c)Cardiotoxicity

<<<PAGE 24>>>
19 
 
Atovaquone 
Inhibits parasite 
mitochondrial 
electron transport 
chain (complex III) 
70 hrs. 
Blood 
schizonticide 
(used primarily 
for MDR Pf.) 
 
a)Erratic 
absorption 
b)High 
recrudescence rate 
when used alone 
Pyronaridine 
Inhibits vacuolar 
degradation, leading 
tot impaired Hb 
degradation 
60 hrs. 
 Schizonticide 
for PF, PV, 
MDR, PF 
a)Good oral 
absorption 
 
b)Cross resistance 
not yet documented 
 
c)Well tolerated 
 
Sulfadoxine - 
Pyrimethamine 
Acts against the 
parasite 
dihydrofolate 
reductase enzyme 
Sulfadoxin
e – 180 
hrs. 
Pyrimetha
mine – 95 
hrs 
Active against 
blood schizonts of 
P. falciparum. 
Less active 
against other 
species 
a) Can be used 
against chloroquine 
resistant P. 
falciparum. 
b) No cross 
resistance with the 
4 aminoquinolines, 
mefloquine, 
quinine, 
artemisinin 
derivatives 
Risk of severe skin 
reactions 
Primaquine 
May get converted to 
electrophiles that act 
as redox mediators 
6 hrs. 
 Destroys late 
hepatic stage 
and latent forms 
of PV and PO 
 Gametocidal to 
all sp., mainly 
Pf. 
 No action on 
the erythrocyte 
stage of Pf., 
though active 
against the 
hepatic stage 
Useful for the 
terminal 
prophylaxis and 
radical cure of PV 
and PO 
Cannot be used in a 
patient with G-6PD 
deficiency. 
Proguanil 
Selective inhibition 
of the bi-functional 
dihydrofolate 
reductase-
thymidylate 
synthetase of Pl. 
16 hrs. 
Weak 
schizonticidal 
action against all 
species. 
 
Good prophylactic 
agent for Pf or 
mixed infection, 
when used with 
chloroquine 
 
Can not be used 
alone in the 
treatment of 
malaria

<<<PAGE 25>>>
20 
 
Reference 
1. 
WHO Guidelines for malaria 2015. 
who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/162441/9789241549127_eng.pdf?sequence=1 
2. 
http://nvbdcp.gov.in/index1.php?lang=1&level=0&linkid=519&lid=3795 
 
2.3 Dengue 
2.3.1 Introduction 
Dengue virus infection is an acute febrile illness caused by dengue viruses (DEN-1 to 4) 
belonging to the family Flaviviridae. Dengue viruses are transmitted to humans through 
the bite of infected Aedes mosquitoes, principally Aedes aegypti. 
 
2.3.2 Symptoms 
The incubation period varies from 4 to 7 days. Patients with dengue infection may not 
have specific localizing symptoms at the time of presentation. Moderate to a high-grade 
fever which is sudden in onset is a universal complaint, which lasts for up to 6 days. 
Patients usually experience an abrupt onset of a severe headache, retro-orbital pain, and 
as the name “break-bone fever” suggests is associated with a backache, severe myalgias. 
Pain in abdomen in dengue fever may be as a warning sign and suggests the need for 
admission and close monitoring. Causes of pain abdomen in dengue infection include 
stretching of liver capsule due to hepatitis, pancreatitis, acalculous cholecystitis and 
peptic ulcer. 
 
2.3.3 WHO grading system 
The classification helps decide regarding admission, close monitoring, providing 
supportive care and prognosticate. 
1. DF without warning signs: defined as fever along with two of the following criteria: 
nausea/vomiting, rash, aches and pains, leukopenia, positive tourniquet test. 
2. DF with warning signs: defined as fever with abdominal pain or tenderness, 
persistent vomiting, clinical fluid accumulation (ascites or pleural effusion), mucosal 
bleeding, lethargy or restlessness, liver enlargement >2 cm, or when a laboratory 
parameter includes an increase in hematocrit with concurrent rapid fall in platelet 
count. 
3. DF is severe dengue: defined as fever with evidence of plasma leakage leading to 
shock (dengue shock syndrome) or fluid accumulation with respiratory distress, severe 
bleeding (as evaluated by a clinician), and /or severe organ involvement (i.e., AST or 
ALT 1000 or greater, impaired consciousness or organ failure).

<<<PAGE 26>>>
21 
 
 
 
Fig 2.1 WHO Classification 2009 
 
 
WHO developed terminology “expanded dengue” in the year 2012 to describe unusual 
manifestations in the form of severe organ involvement such as liver, kidneys, brain or 
heart. These unusual manifestations may be associated with co-infections, co-morbidities 
like 
diabetes 
mellitus, 
COPD, 
pregnancy, 
extremes 
of 
age 
and 
other 
immunocompromised states or complications of prolonged shock and consequent organ 
failure. 
 
 
2.3.4 Signs 
Cutaneous manifestations are another important clue to the diagnosis of dengue fever. In 
patients with dengue infection, initially, there is transient flushing of the face due to 
capillary dilatation. After 3-6 days of onset of fever, blanchable maculopapular rash 
associated with itching appears. Some patients develop hemorrhagic manifestations such 
as petechiae, subconjunctival haemorrhages and ecchymoses with positive tourniquet 
test, particularly in severe dengue infection. In some cases, individual lesions may 
coalesce and are seen as generalized confluent erythema with rounded islands of sparing 
described as “white islands in a sea of red”. Hepatomegaly of more than 2 cm is a 
warning sign of dengue according to WHO. This is an important clue in the outpatient 
department to admit a patient of suspected dengue.

<<<PAGE 27>>>
22 
 
2.3.5 Complications 
In severe dengue patients develop bleeding manifestations, out of which gastrointestinal 
bleeding in the form of melena is the commonest bleeding manifestation. Neurological 
manifestations are uncommon as dengue is a non-neurotropic virus, though occasional 
cases of dengue encephalopathy, encephalitis, myelitis, Guillain Barre (GB) syndrome 
and myositis are reported. A high index of suspicion is required in patients with dengue 
fever during convalescence about intracranial bleed when they present with altered 
sensorium. Serious bleeding manifestations in the form of subdural hematoma (SDH) and 
intracerebral bleed are also described. Increased menstrual flow (menorrhagia) as a 
bleeding complication in dengue infection is described in the literature as case reports. 
 
2.3.6 Diagnosis 
2.3.6.1 Dengue-specific 
During the early part of dengue infection, it can be diagnosed by virus isolation in cell 
culture, by detection of viral RNA by nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT), or by 
detection of viral antigens i.e. non-structural protein 1(NS1) by ELISA or rapid tests. 
Currently, dengue infection can be diagnosed in the clinical setting during the first one 
week of illness with the detection of NS1 antigen. Rapid dengue antigen detection tests 
can be used in field settings to detect infection in less than an hour. During the primary 
infection with dengue virus, IgM antibody is the first immunoglobulin isotype to appear 
and will rise to detectable levels at around 7 days followed by IgG antibody rise. In 
contrast during secondary dengue infection, IgG antibody titers rise rapidly during the 
first week with lower titers of IgM, though detectable levels. 
 
 
 
2.3.6.2 Rouitne blood investigations 
Routine investigations help in suspecting dengue fever before the confirmatory test 
results. Raised haemoglobin level, raised hematocrit, low total leucocyte count and 
mildly low platelet counts are initial indicators for dengue infection. Low haemoglobin 
occasionally can be seen due to preexisting nutritional anaemia or due to bleeding 
manifestations. Leucocytosis should not be ignored in a case of diagnosed dengue 
infection as it may indicate a secondary bacterial infection. Severe cases with dengue 
shock have coagulopathy, manifested by a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin 
time (aPTT). 
 
2.3.6.3 LFT & RFT 
Hepatic dysfunction is a well-recognized feature of dengue infection due to the direct 
involvement of liver cells by dengue virus and by the unregulated host immune response 
against the virus. It is characterized by hepatomegaly and mild to moderate increase in 
transaminase levels although jaundice and acute liver failure are uncommon. Clinicians 
should advise a liver function test in a case of acute pyrexia. Significant 
hypoalbuminemia observed in severe forms of dengue. Complete urine examination may

<<<PAGE 28>>>
23 
 
reveal hematuria and albuminuria in some patients. Renal involvement and elevated 
serum creatinine are rare in dengue patients. 
 
2.3.6.4 Chest X-Ray 
Chest radiographic abnormalities include pleural effusions and bilateral infiltrates 
suggestive of ARDS in severe dengue grades. 
 
2.3.6.5 ECG 
Electrocardiography may show bradycardia and prolonged PR interval. Myocarditis in 
dengue infection can manifest with complete AV block or ventricular arrhythmias, which 
manifest as syncope or palpitations. ECG changes in dengue fever include sinus 
bradycardia, PR prolongation, ST-segment elevation and non-specific ST-T changes. 
Most of these changes are transient and usually revert to normal. 
 
2.3.6.6 USG Abdomen 
Ultrasonogram of the abdomen may show gall bladder wall thickness of more than 5 mm 
(acalculous cholecystitis), fatty liver, ascites and pleural effusions depending on the 
severity of dengue. 
 
2.3.7 Management 
 2.3.7.1 General principles of management 
Abnormal hemostasis and plasma leakage are the pathophysiologic hallmarks of dengue 
infection which are represented by thrombocytopenia and haemoconcentration. General 
principles management of dengue include 
 Treatment of dengue is dynamic involving initial treatment and reassessment 
periodically till patient completes critical phase. 
 Fever can be treated with paracetamol and the dosing should not be less than six 
hours. Tepid sponge if the patient still has a high fever. 
 Do not give acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), ibuprofen or other non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) as these drugs may aggravate gastritis or bleeding. 
 Antibiotics are not needed. 
 Plenty of oral fluids should be given if there are no warning signs. 
 Daily monitoring of temperature, the volume of fluid intake, urine output (volume 
and frequency), warning signs, signs of plasma leakage and bleeding, haematocrit, 
and white blood cell and platelet counts should be done. 
 Look for warning signs and manage accordingly.

<<<PAGE 29>>>
24 
 
2.3.7.2 WHO recommendations 
Group A Dengue fever without warning signs: need not be admitted and should be 
advised home care with close daily monitoring for disease progression in the form of 
decreasing white blood cell count, defervescence and warning signs of dengue until they 
are out of the critical period. These are patients who are able to tolerate adequate volumes 
of oral fluids and pass urine at least once every six hours and do not have any of the 
warning signs, particularly when the fever subsides. Adequate oral fluid intake to patients 
initially may be able to reduce the number of hospitalizations. Oral fluids should contain 
electrolytes and sugar to replace losses from fever and vomiting. Patients who are sent 
home should be monitored daily by health care providers for temperature pattern, the 
volume of fluid intake and losses, urine output (volume and frequency), warning signs, 
signs of plasma leakage and bleeding, haematocrit, and white blood cell and platelet 
counts. If a patient does not show any clinical improvement and deteriorates around the 
time of defervescence, should be referred for in-hospital management and follow the 
action plan. 
 
Group B Dengue patients with warning signs: The warning signs include abdominal 
pain or tenderness, persistent vomiting, clinical fluid accumulation (ascites or pleural 
effusion), mucosal bleeding, lethargy or restlessness, liver enlargement >2 cm, or when a 
laboratory parameter includes an increase in hematocrit with concurrent rapid fall in 
platelet count. Patients need to be admitted to a secondary health care centre for close 
observation, particularly as they approach the critical phase. These include patients with 
warning signs, those with co-existing conditions such as pregnancy, infancy, old age, 
obesity, diabetes mellitus, renal failure and other comorbid conditions. 
Start intravenous administration of 0.9% saline or Ringer’s lactate, or Hartmann’s 
solution. Start with 5–7 ml/ kg/hour for 1–2 hours, then reduce to 3–5 ml/kg/hr for 2–4 
hours, and then reduce to 2–3 ml/kg/hr or less according to the clinical response. If the 
vital signs are worsening and haematocrit is rising rapidly, increase the rate to 5–10 
ml/kg/hour for 1–2 hours. Reassess the clinical status, repeat the haematocrit and review 
fluid infusion rates accordingly. Sometimes patients receive intravenous fluids elsewhere 
and present with complications like myocarditis and fluid overload. Fluids containing 
glucose may exacerbate hyperglycaemia of physiological stress from dengue and in 
patients with diabetes mellitus. WHO guidelines suggest that the intramuscular injections 
are contraindicated in patients with dengue as they can result in large intramuscular 
hematoma. 
 
Group C: Severe dengue includes severe plasma leakage leading to dengue shock or 
fluid accumulation with respiratory distress, severe haemorrhages or severe organ 
impairment (hepatic damage, renal impairment, cardiomyopathy, encephalopathy or 
encephalitis). All patients with severe dengue should be admitted to a hospital with 
access to intensive care facilities and blood transfusion. Judicious intravenous fluid

<<<PAGE 30>>>
25 
 
resuscitation is essential and usually, the sole intervention required. Plasma losses should 
be replaced immediately and rapidly with isotonic crystalloid solution. It is important to 
monitor haematocrit levels before and after fluid resuscitation. Start with isotonic 
crystalloid solutions at 5-10 ml/kg/hr over 2-4 hours. If the patient improves intravenous 
fluids can be reduced to 2-3 ml/kg/hr. But if hematocrit increases IV crystalloid or colloid 
solution at 20 ml/kg as a bolus for 15 minutes needs to be administered. If hematocrit 
increases a second bolus of IV fluid may be given. If hematocrit falls below 40% in 
females and <45% in males suspect bleeding. Packed red cell transfusion in case of 
bleeding recommended. Platelet transfusion is required only if there is clinical evidence 
of bleeding. 
References 
1. World Health Organization. Dengue/ Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever: Diagnosis, treatment, 
prevention and control. New Edition. Geneva: WHO, 2009:3-54. 
2. World Health Organization Comprehensive guidelines for prevention and treatment of dengue 
and dengue hemorrhagic fever. New Delhi: WHO, SEARO;revised and expanded edition. 
3. GN Malavige, PK Ranatunga, VGNS Vilathanthriri, S Fernando, DH Karunatolaka, J Aaskov, 
et al. Patterns of disease in Sri Lankan dengue patients. Arch Dis Child 2006; 91:3. 
4. Chandralekha, Gupta P, Trikha A. The North Indian dengue out break 2006: a retrospective 
analysis of intensive care unit admissions in a tertiary care hospital. Trans R Soc Trop Med 
Hyg2008;102:143-7. 
5. Melani W, Samsi TK, Wulur H, Sugianto D, Pool TN. Dengue haemorrhagic fever: ultrasound 
as an aid to predict the severity of the disease. Pediatr Radiol 1998; 28:1 
 
2.4 Scrub typhus 
2.4.1 Introduction 
Scrub typhus is caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi (O.tsutsugamushi) an obligatory intra-
cellular gram-negative bacterium but it is not easily stained with gram’s stain. It is 
transmitted to humans by the bite of larval mites (chiggers) of Leptotrombidium deliense. 
Primary reservoir and vector for the disease is Leptotrombidium deliense, a trombiculid 
mite. Rattus is a common reservoir. During wet season the mites lay eggs on vegetation. 
That is why transmission is seasonal, and the peak of scrub typhus occurs during 
monsoon and continues in to cooler months in India. 
Incubation period of scrub typhus is 6 to 21 days. 
Pathogenesis involves focal or disseminated vasculitis and perivasculitis, involving the 
lungs, heart, liver, spleen, kidney and central nervous system (CNS).

<<<PAGE 31>>>
26 
 
2.4.2 Clinical manifestations 
The symptoms may be mild and the clinical course self-limited, with spontaneous 
recovery after a few days in some cases. But in some patients, the disease may be more 
severe and protracted, and may be fatal. 
Initial clinical features of scrub typhus patients include fever, headache, myalgia, cough 
and loose motions. 
In severe cases encephalitis and interstitial pneumonia are seen. 
 The classic case description of scrub typhus includes an eschar at the site of chigger 
feeding, regional lymphadenopathy, and a maculopapular rash. An eschar at the wound 
site is the single most useful diagnostic clue. Though eschar was pathognomic of scrub 
typhus, it was noted in less percentage of patients in Indian studies. 
 Respiratory tract involvement is a common manifestation of scrub typhus. Cough and 
breathlessness are seen in majority of patients. Atypical pneumonia, consolidation, 
respiratory failure and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) requiring ventilator 
support are the common complications in patients with scrub typhus. 
 Gastrointestinal system symptoms in the form of vomiting and loose motions are 
common presenting features of scrub typhus. Clinicians should suspect scrub typhus in a 
case of fever and diarrhea if accompanied by symptoms of respiratory or central nervous 
system in an endemic area. 
 Acute renal failure is another important complication in scrub typhus and may need 
dialysis occasionally. 
 Scrub typhus, as the name suggests is characterized by fever with altered sensorium in 
some 
cases. 
CNS 
involvement 
ranges 
from 
aseptic 
meningitis 
to 
frank 
meningoencephalitis. 
 The existence of myocarditis in scrub typhus is easily ignored; because the symptoms of 
myocardial involvement are usually subclinical. Cardiac conduction abnormalities in the 
form of bradycardia can be seen on electrocardiogram. 
 
2.4.3 Investigation 
 In scrub typhus complete blood counts show anemia, thrombocytopenia and occasionally 
leukocytosis. 
 Liver function tests show elevated hepatic transaminases in which ALT is found to be 
more than AST and physicians need to pay attention to these observations in endemic 
areas. 
 Elevation in serum creatinine can also be seen in some patients of scrub patients. 
 Chest radiograph abnormalities in the form of reticulonodular opacities, air space 
consolidation, peribronchial infiltration, pulmonary congestion. and pleural effusion.

<<<PAGE 32>>>
27 
 
2.4.4 Diagnostic tests 
 Serological testing using IgM ELISA continues to be the mainstay in the laboratory 
diagnosis of scrub typhus. Indirect immunoflourescence test is the gold standard diagnostic 
test for scrub. 
 Weil-Felix agglutination test is not a very sensitive test, it has high specificity and a 
positive predictive value. Weil felix can be a useful tool when used and interpreted in 
correct clinical context. 
 
2.4.5 Treatment: 
Table 2.7: Treatment guideline for Scrub typhus 
Etiology 
Primary treatment 
Alternative regimen 
Remarks 
Scrub 
typhus 
infection 
Doxycycline 100mg 
per 
dose 
administered 
twice 
daily 
(orally 
or 
intravenously) 
for 
adults or 2.2mg per 
Kg for children less 
than 45.5 Kg for 7 
days to a maximum 
of 15 days 
chloramphenicol (500 mg 4 
times a day orally for 7days in 
adults or 150 mg per kg per 
day for 5 days in children (been 
proven effective in treating 
scrub typhus and preventing 
relapse) 
Rifampicin or azithromycin or 
clarithromycin are effective in 
doxycycline resistant strains of 
scrub typhus 
India 
where 
tuberculosis 
is 
endemic 
monotherapy with 
rifampicin 
is 
strongly 
discouraged 
 
Conclusion 
Scrub typhus clinically mimics infections like dengue viral infection, leptospirosis, malaria, 
pneumonia as all of them may be associated with sudden onset fever, mild hepatitis and 
thromocytopaenia. In patients in the endemic areas, presenting with fever, respiratory symptoms 
and hepatitis, scrub typhus should be considered in the differential diagnosis. As delay in 
treatment may lead to complications and higher mortality, empiric treatment with doxycycline or 
macrolides may be given in cases where scrub typhus is suspected if facilities for diagnosis are 
not available. 
 
References 
1. MVS Subbalaxmi, Murali Krishna M, A Krishna Prasad, VD Teja, K Swaroopa, Naval 
Chandra, et al. Outbreak of Scrub Typhus in Andhra Pradesh – Experience at a Tertiary Care 
Hospital. J Assoc Physicians India 2014; 62:496-28

<<<PAGE 33>>>
28 
 
2. Narvencar KP, Rodrigues S, Nevrekar RP, Dias A, Vaz M, Gomes E. Scrub typhus in patients 
reporting with acute febrile illness at a tertiary health care institution in Goa. Indian J Med 
Res2012:136:1020-1024. 
3. Nachega JB, Bottieau E, Zech F et al. Travel-acquired scrub typhus: emphasis on the 
differential diagnosis, treatment, and prevention strategies. J Travel Med 2007; 14:352–5 
4. Rahi M, Gupte MD, Bhargava A, Varghese GM, Arora R. DHR-ICMR Guidelines for 
Diagnosis & Management of Rickettsial Diseases in India. The Indian Journal of Medical 
Research. 2015;141(4):417-422. doi:10.4103/0971-5916.159279. 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. Dr. MVS Subbalaxmi 
 
Additional Professor 
 
Dept of general medicine 
 
Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, 
 
Hyderabad, Telangana. 
 
2. Dr. Sagar Khadanga 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Medicine 
 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
 
Bhopal

<<<PAGE 34>>>
29 
 
CHAPTER: 3 
Management of Sepsis 
 
3.1 Introduction 
Sepsis and septic shock are the major causes of morbidity and mortality in the intensive 
care unit patients worldwide. Indian data shows a severe sepsis or septic shock incidence 
of 28% with a mortality of 18% in the adult ICU population. Early identification of sepsis 
and septic shock patients and appropriate management in the initial hours has seen a 
nearly 50% reduction in mortality during the last decade. 
 
3.2 Definitions 
Sepsis is defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host 
response to infection. The organ dysfunction is represented by an acute increase in the 
Sequential [Sepsis-related] Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score of 2 points or more 
(with the baseline assumed to be 0 in patients without any known pre-existing organ 
dysfunction). 
Septic shock is a subset of sepsis in which particularly profound circulatory, cellular, and 
metabolic abnormalities are associated with a greater risk of mortality than with sepsis 
alone. Clinically they are identified by a vasopressor requirement to maintain mean 
arterial pressure of ≥ 65 mmHg and serum lactate level greater than 2 mmol/L 
(>18mg/dL) in absence of hypovolemia. 
Sepsis is the primary cause of death from infection, especially if not recognized and 
treated promptly. 
 
 
3.3 When to suspect 
Adult patients with suspected infection can be quickly screened for likelihood of having 
poor outcomes typical of sepsis if they have at least 2 of the following 3 clinical criteria: 
1. Respiratory rate of 22/minute or greater 
2. Altered mentation 
3. Systolic blood pressure of 100 mmHg or less. 
These together constitute a bedside clinical score termed quick SOFA (qSOFA). It is a 
simple risk stratification tool that can be used to identify patients at risk of sepsis in out-
of-hospital, emergency department and general hospital ward settings. 
Infection-induced organ dysfunction may be occult; therefore, all patients with infection 
should be carefully evaluated. Conversely, any unexplained acute onset of organ 
dysfunction should also raise the possibility of an underlying infection.

<<<PAGE 35>>>
30 
 
 
3.4 Diagnosis 
In patients with suspected sepsis or septic shock, appropriate routine microbiologic 
cultures should be obtained before initiation of antimicrobial therapy from all potential 
sites of infection. These may include blood, respiratory secretions, urine, cerebrospinal 
fluid, wounds, and other body fluids. If it is not logistically possible to obtain cultures 
promptly (45 minutes), the appropriate antimicrobials should be administered. 
In sepsis or septic shock patients, the diagnosis includes identification of a specific 
anatomic site of infection requiring emergent source control. 
Clinical experience with molecular diagnostic methods for the diagnosis of infection is 
still limited and needs further verification before they can be recommended for use in 
clinical practice. 
3.5 Management 
Sepsis and septic shock are medical emergencies requiring urgent assessment, aggressive 
management and repeated revaluation of the response to treatment. Sepsis management is 
simplified using the “bundle” approach. A bundle is a selected set of elements of care 
that, when implemented as a group, effects the outcomes beyond implementing the 
individual elements alone. Lower mortality has been observed in hospitals with higher 
compliance of sepsis bundle. 
The 1st hour of the patient with sepsis and septic shock within the healthcare facility is the 
GOLDEN HOUR and appropriate management can make a significant difference to 
patient outcomes (box 1). 
Box 1: Hour-1 Surviving Sepsis Campaign Bundle of Care: The Golden Hour 
 
 
1. Measure lactate level. Re-measure if initial lactate level > 2 mmol/L.* 
2. Obtain blood cultures before administering antibiotics.** 
3. Administer broad-spectrum antibiotics. 
4. Begin rapid IVadministration of 30mL/kg crystalloid for hypotension or 
lactate level ≥ 4 mmol/L.*** 
5. Apply vasopressors if patient is hypotensive during or after fluid resuscitation 
to maintain MAP ≥ 65 mm Hg. ****

<<<PAGE 36>>>
31 
 
*"Time zero" or "time of presentation" is defined as the time of triage in the emergency 
department or, if presenting from another healthcare facility, from the earliest time-point 
in the treatment chart wherein, the patient had all the features consistent with sepsis. 
**Two or more sets of blood cultures are recommended before initiation of any new 
antimicrobial in all patients with suspected sepsis. 
***Hydroxyethyl starches (HESs) are not recommended for intravascular volume 
replacement in patients with sepsis or septic shock. 
**** Norepinephrine is the first-choice vasopressor. 
Circulatory shock is possible with normal arterial blood pressure, and not all patients with 
arterial hypotension have a circulatory shock. Resuscitation aims to normalize lactate in 
patients with elevated lactate levels as a marker of tissue hypoperfusion. A targeted 
central venous pressure (CVP) alone is not recommended to guide the fluid resuscitation. 
IV hydrocortisone can be used in the treatment of septic shock if hypotension is 
persisting even after adequate fluid resuscitation and vasopressor use. IV 
immunoglobulins are not recommended for the management of sepsis or septic shock. 
 
3.6 Antimicrobial therapy 
Intravenous antimicrobials must be initiated as soon as possible after recognition for both 
sepsis and septic shock. In absence of a definitive diagnosis at presentation, which is 
common (in the Golden hour), empiric broad-spectrum therapy should be initiated to 
cover all likely pathogens (including bacterial, potentially fungal or viral coverage). 
Selection of an optimal empiric antimicrobial regimen in sepsis and septic shock is one of 
the central determinants of outcome. Various factors which must be taken into 
consideration for deciding the choice of empiric antimicrobial therapy are shown in box 
2. 
 
Box 2: Factors determining the selection of antimicrobials for sepsis and septic 
shock 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Clinical syndrome/site of infection 
2. Prevalent pathogens and their resistance patterns 
3. Severity of illness 
4. Age and concomitant underlying diseases, chronic organ failures, 
medications, indwelling devices 
5. Immunosuppression or other form of immunocompromise 
6. Recent infections, intake of antimicrobials within the previous 3 months

<<<PAGE 37>>>
32 
 
Sepsis can originate from community locations as well as a healthcare facility. About 
80% of hospital-treated sepsis cases arise in the community. The common sites of 
infection leading to sepsis include lungs followed by abdomen, bloodstream, renal and 
genitourinary tracts.Refer to the appropriate sections in this guideline for the empirical 
antibiotic therapy for a different site of infection. The table below gives empirical therapy 
for sepsis when the source is unclear. 
 
Table 3.1: Antimicrobial choice for disease conditions 
 
Diagnosis 
Suggested regimens
Remarks
 
Preferred 
Alternative 
 
Sepsis or septic 
shock 
with 
focus unclear 
 
 
Rule 
out 
common 
tropical 
infections 
(chapter 1) 
 
 
Refer 
to 
appropriate 
sections 
for 
empirical 
antibiotic 
therapy 
for 
different 
sites 
of infection 
 
Imipenem-
Cilastatin 
+/- 
Amikacin 
 
+/- 
Vancomycin 
Teicoplanin 
 
+/- doxycycline 
+/- Colistin or 
polymyxin B 
*If risk factors 
for candida add 
an 
echinocandin 
(Caspofungin 
or micafungin 
or 
anidulafungin) 
Meropenem 
or 
Cefoperazone 
–Sulbactam 
 
+/- 
Amikacin 
 
+/- 
Vancomycin 
or 
Teicoplanin 
 Septic 
shock 
patient 
must 
receive 
empiric 
combination 
therapy 
with 
at 
least 
two 
antibiotics 
of 
different 
antimicrobial classes. 
 Add 
MRSA 
or 
CR-GNB 
coverage 
or 
antifungals 
in 
patients with appropriate risk 
factors. 
 Avoid 
piperacillin-tazobactam 
in septic shock till bacteremia 
with 
cephalosporin 
resistant 
organisms 
is 
excluded, 
as 
mortality increases (MERINO 
trial)6 
 De-escalation of antimicrobials 
should be considered daily and 
at the earliest stage when the 
clinical situation permits/ once 
culture susceptibility reports are 
available** 
 Treatment duration of 7 to 10 
days is adequate for most cases. 
 Longer courses appropriate in 
slow 
clinical 
response, 
undrainable foci of infection, 
bacteremia with S. aureus, some 
fungal and viral infections, or 
immunologic deficiencies. 
 Measurement of procalcitonin 
levels can be used to support 
shortening 
the 
duration 
of 
antimicrobial therapy.

<<<PAGE 38>>>
33 
 
*Risk factors for invasive Candida infections include immunocompromised status 
(neutropenia, chemotherapy, transplant, diabetes mellitus, chronic liver failure, chronic 
renal failure), prolonged invasive vascular devices (hemodialysis catheters, central 
venous catheters), total parenteral nutrition, necrotizing pancreatitis, recent major 
surgery (particularly abdominal), prolonged administration of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics, prolonged hospital/ICU admission, recent fungal infection, and multisite 
colonization. Triazoles are acceptable in hemodynamically stable, less ill patients who 
have not had previous triazole exposure and are not known to be colonized with azole-
resistant species. 
 
**If the infection is subsequently proven not to exist, then antimicrobials should be 
discontinued. De-escalation includes discontinuation of combination therapy within the 
first few days in response to clinical improvement and/or evidence of infection resolution. 
 
3.7 Metabolic, ventilation therapy and other adjunct therapy 
Other important aspects of care of the patients with sepsis and septic shock include the 
use of blood products, mechanical ventilation, sedation and analgesia, glucose control, 
renal replacement therapy, venous thromboembolism prophylaxis, stress ulcer 
prophylaxis, and nutrition. 
 
Table 3.2: Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
 
 
R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Antibiotics 
Doses, duration and route of administration 
Imipenem-Cilastatin 
500 mg IV q6h or 1g q8h 
Amikacin 
15 mg/kg IV q24h 
Meropenem 
1gm IV q8h 
Cefoperazone –
Sulbactam 
 3g IV q12h 
Vancomycin 
15 mg/kg IV q8–12h 
Teicoplanin 
 400mg IV every 12h for 3 doses followed by 400mg IV q24h 
+/- doxycycline 
100 mg iv q12h 
+/- Colistin 
9mu iv stat, then 4.5 mu iv q12h 
Polymyxin B 
15-20 lak units iv stat, then 7.5-10 laks iv q12h 
Caspofungin 
70 mg IV on day 1, then 50 mg IV q24h 
micafungin 
100 mg iv od 
anidulafungin 
200 mg iv stat then 100 mg iv od

<<<PAGE 39>>>
34 
 
References 
1. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al (2016). The Third International Consensus 
Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 315:801–810. 
2. Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC, et al (2017). Time to treatment and mortality during 
mandated emergency care for sepsis. N Engl J Med 376: 2235–44. 
3. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al (2017). Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international 
guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 45: 486–552. 
4. Levy MM, Evans LE, Rhodes A (2018). The Surviving Sepsis Campaign Bundle: 2018 
Update. Crit Care Med 46(6):997-1000. 
5. Cecconi M, Evans L, Levy M, Rhodes A (2018). Sepsis and septic shock. Lancet 
392(10141):75-87. 
6. Harris et al (2018). Effect of Piperacillin-Tazobactam vs Meropenem on 30-Day Mortality for 
Patients with E coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae Bloodstream Infection and Ceftriaxone 
Resistance A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 320(10):984-994. 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. Dr. Manish Soneja 
Associate Professor 
Department of Medicine 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences. 
 
2. Dr. BK Rao 
Chairman and Senior Consultant 
Institute of Critical Care Medicine 
Sir Ganga Ram Hospital 
Delhi

<<<PAGE 40>>>
35 
 
CHAPTER: 4 
Management of Respiratory tract infections (RTI) & 
Community Acquired Pneumonia (CAP) 
 
4.1 Upper respiratory tract infections (URTI) 
4.1.1 Definition 
 The term upper respiratory tract infections (URTI) include acute rhinitis/ 
rhinosinusitis, acute pharyngitis/ tonsillopharyngitis, acute epiglottitis, acute 
laryngitis and acute otitis media. 
 These infections are the commonest reasons for outpatient visits as well as 
antibiotic misuse in both adults and children. 
 
4.1.2 Causative Agents 
The usual causative agents of URTI are viruses including rhinovirus, influenza, 
parainfluenza, RSV, human metapneumovirus, enterovirus, adenovirus, Ebstein Barr 
virus and herpes simplex virus. 
Non-viral causes include Streptococcus pyogenes, Pneumococcus, Moraxella, H. 
influenzae, S. aureus, B. pertussis, Mycoplasma, gonorrhoea and C. diphtheriae. 
 
4.1.3 Resistance pattern 
Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci (GABHS) is universally sensitive to penicillin. 
Pneumococcal resistance in non meningeal isolates is very low in our country and hence 
standard doses of amoxicillin generally suffice. Conversely, pneumococcal resistance to 
co-trimoxazole and macrolides is widespread. Resistance to amoxicillin by production of 
beta lactamase in Hemophilus influenzae is around 30% and that in Moraxella is 90%. 
 
4.1.4 Signs and Symptoms 
The usual presenting features of URTI include sore throat, runny/ blocked nose; cough 
with or without systemic symptoms including fever and malaise. The term influenza like 
illness is used when there are systemic signs such as fever and malaise along with the 
upper respiratory symptoms. 
4.1.5 Management: Investigation and diagnosis 
 
4.1.5.1 Viral URTI 
 These illnesses are best treated with symptomatic therapy including paracetamol, 
nasal saline drops, rest, oral fluids, humidification and certain home remedies 
such as honey, ginger etc.

<<<PAGE 41>>>
36 
 
 In selected cases oral and nasal decongestants and anti-tussives such as 
dextromethorphan/ codeine may be used. 
 Antimicrobial therapy is not indicated for viral URTI. The patients should be 
warned about symptoms which indicate complications like breathing difficulty, 
persistent fever beyond 4-5 days or ear pain. 
 The use of oseltamivir in patients with influenza when started within 48 hours of 
onset reduces duration of symptoms by 1 day, viral shedding/ infectiousness and 
may reduce the risk of development of complications. 
 Empiric therapy with oseltamivir may be considered in patients with influenza 
like illness during an ongoing outbreak if they are at high risk of complications 
such as pregnant women, those with co-morbidities and the immunocompromised. 
 
 4.1.5.2 Bacterial Pharyngitis 
 Group A beta haemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis (GABHS) usually affects 
children between 5 and 15 years of age and is characterized by sudden onset of 
fever, sore throat with pain during swallowing. 
 Examination findings include tonsillo-pharyngeal erythema and exudates, palatal 
petechiae, tender anterior cervical adenopathy and sometimes scarlatiniform rash. 
The positive predictive value of these signs for streptococcal sore throat is around 
60%. 
 The centor score (3 of 4 criteria) can be used to predict a bacterial etiology: 
exudative pharyngitis, tender cervical lymphadenopathy, fever, absence of cough. 
 Confirmation of diagnosis by rapid antigen test or throat swab culture is desirable 
but not always possible. 
 Treatment is with penicillin V/ amoxicillin is for 10 days. 
 Presence of features indicative of viral etiology including coryza, conjunctivitis, 
cough, hoarseness, diarrhea, ulcerations and viral exanthema have high negative 
predictive value for GABHS pharyngitis and here diagnostic testing and 
antimicrobial therapy is not indicated. 
 
4.1.6.1 Bacterial sinusitis should be suspected in the following situations. 
a) Persistence and non-improvement of symptoms and signs of acute rhinosinusitis 
beyond 10 days. 
b) Worsening of symptoms or signs including new onset fever, headache or increase 
in nasal discharge following a typical viral URI that lasted 5-6 days and was 
initially improving (double sickening). 
c) Acute onset of high fever with facial pain or purulent nasal discharge for at least 3-
4 days. 
d) The recommended treatment for patients with mild disease is amoxicillin and for 
severe cases/ history of prior antibiotic use or non response to first line therapy is

<<<PAGE 42>>>
37 
 
co-amoxiclav. Treatment duration in adults is for 5-7 days and in children 10-14 
days. 
 
4.1.6.2 Acute otitis media (AOM) is defined as either moderate or severe bulging of the 
tympanic membrane/new onset otorrhoea not due to otitis media OR mild bulging of the 
tympanic membrane AND recent onset of ear pain/ erythema of the tympanic membrane. 
Further AOM should not be diagnosed in the absence of middle ear effusion as 
demonstrated by pneumatic otoscopy or tympanometry. 
 
Pain assessment and relief by using paracetamol or ibuprofen is crucial. Factors that 
determine need for antimicrobial therapy include the age of the child, whether the disease 
is unilateral or bilateral, and whether disease is severe (temperature 39 0C or higher OR 
severe otalgia OR otalgia persisting for more than 48 hours). 
 
Antibiotic therapy is definitely indicated in any child with otorrhea or severe disease or 
bilateral AOM in children below the age of 24 months. All other situations (children 
older than 24 months with non severe AOM whether unilateral or bilateral) or children 
between 6-24 months with non severe unilateral AOM can be managed with watchful 
waiting for 48-72 hours or use of antibiotics either upfront or if there is failure to improve 
with conservative management. 
 
The first line drug for patients who have not received penicillin in the past one month and 
those with absence of purulent conjunctivitis is amoxicillin. Co- amoxiclav should be 
used in others and if the patient fails to respond to amoxicillin. The duration of therapy 
for severe disease and children less than 2 years is 10 days. Children between 2 and 5 
years with mild disease can be treated for 7 days and those above 5 years with 5-7 days of 
therapy. 
Table 4.1: Antimicrobial therapy in URTI 
Condition 
Preferred drug 
Alternative 
Penicillin allergy 
Streptococcal 
pharyngitis 
Penicillin V (not 
easily available in 
India, Penicillin G 
not 
a 
substitute 
since 
oral 
absorption is poor 
Amoxicillin 
Benzathine 
penicillin 
single 
dose 
 
Anaphylactic: clindamycin/ 
clarithromycin/ 
azithromycin 
Non-anaphylactic: 
cephalexin/ cefadroxil 
Bacterial 
sinusitis 
 
Amoxicillin 
Co-amoxiclav 
Ceftriaxone 
Cefpodoxime 
(adults) 
Adults: doxycycline/ resp 
quinolones 
Children: 
Anaphylactic 
resp 
quinolones, 
Non-
anaphylactic: cefixime and 
clindamycin

<<<PAGE 43>>>
38 
 
Acute 
otitis 
media 
 
Amoxicillin 
Co-amoxiclav 
Cefpodoxime, 
cefuroxime, 
cefdinir, 
Ceftriaxone 
Anaphylactic: 
azithromycin/ 
clarithromycin 
Non-anaphylactic: 
cephalosporins 
 
4.2 
Lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) 
4.2.1 Acute bronchitis 
Acute tracheobronchitis is characterized by cough and phlegm production. The predominant 
etiology is viral. Antibiotics are not indicated even if sputum is purulent. Treatment is 
symptomatic; if cough lasts more than 14 days, suspect pertussis and TB. Use macrolides for 
pertussis and work up for AFB. 
 
4.3 Community acquired pneumonia (CAP) 
Community acquired pneumonia (CAP) is one of the most common causes of morbidity and 
mortality in both adults and children. 
 
CAP is characterised by as 
 
Symptoms of an acute lower respiratory tract illness (cough with or without 
expectoration, shortness of breath, pleuritic chest pain) for less than 1 week. 
 
At least one systemic feature (temperature >37.7°C, chills, and rigors, and/or severe 
malaise). 
 
New focal chest signs on examination (bronchial breath sounds and/or crackles); 
with no other explanation for the illness. 
 
When a chest X-Ray is available, CAP is defined as the above with new shadows on 
the X-Ray with no other defined cause. 
 
4.3.1 Etiology and causative agents 
The etiology of CAP includes bacteria (S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, S. aureus, S. 
pyogenes, gram negative bacilli), respiratory viruses (influenza, parainfluenza, RSV, human 
metapneumovirus, 
adenovirus, 
coronavirus), 
the 
atypical 
pneumonia 
pathogens 
(Mycoplasma pneumonia, Chlamydophilia pneumonia, Legionella sp) and tropical 
pathogens (scrub typhus, leptospirosis, melioidosis). The percentage contribution of viruses 
reduces as age advances and the relative contribution of mycoplasma increases. Gram 
negative bacteria are mainly seen in newborns and in the elderly. The etiology of CAP in 
various studies has been established in only 40-70% of the cases. Worldwide including 
India, S. pneumoniae (3-51%) is the commonest organism followed by H. influenza (5-
21%), Mycoplasma pneumoniae (4-24%) and respiratory viruses (influenza, parainfluenza, 
RSV, coronavirus, human metapneumovirus 10-36%). Other agents include Legionella 
species (1-6%) S. aureus (1-2%) and in some predisposed individuals Klebsiella 
pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mycobacterium tuberculosis should also be 
considered a possible etiology in some individuals with a slightly protracted illness.

<<<PAGE 44>>>
39 
 
4.3.2 Resistance Pattern 
Review of recent studies addressing the problem of pneumococcal resistance reveal the very 
low prevalence of resistance to penicillin in non meningeal isolates (< 1%, with revised 
CLSI breakpoints), but high level of resistance to macrolides (25-30%) and cotrimoxazole 
(> 90%). Since penicillin resistance is very low, standard doses of amoxicillin (30-40 mg/ 
kg/day or 500 mg thrice daily in adults)suffice. Resistance in Hib to ampicillin in a recent 
study evaluating lower respiratory tract isolates was 10%. Resistance in invasive Hib 
isolates to ampicillin, macrolides and cotrimoxazole in the IBIS study conducted two 
decades ago was around 40%. 
 
4.3.3 Treatment guideline 
 All patients with CAP should be risk stratified for site of care as outpatients, or 
inpatients based on scores such as CURB -65/ CRB-65, clinical assessment and pulse 
oximetry. Further triage for inpatients for ICU/ WARD admission can be based on 
applying the ATS/ IDSA criteria. 
 Antibiotics should be administered as early as possible in severe CAP. In the 
outpatient setting the diagnosis should be confirmed before starting therapy. 
 The choice of antibiotics depends on various factors including severity of disease, 
presence or absence of co-morbidities, likely pathogen, likely resistance pattern and 
previous antibiotic use. 
 Overall the antibiotic therapy is geared towards covering S. pneumoniae the 
commonest pathogen in CAP. Several studies have looked at the benefit of including 
an atypical cover in the regime and the consensus is that atypical cover/ combination 
therapy is not routinely required in outpatient CAP since the disease is mild, the 
benefit of treatment for mycoplasma/ Chlamydia is controversial and macrolides may 
be associated with cardiac abnormalities in the elderly. 
 Combination therapy with beta-lactam and macrolide is indicated in outpatient CAP in 
the presence of co-morbidities or antibiotic use in previous three months and in all 
inpatient CAP. The rationale for combination therapy in these settings is to expand the 
spectrum and covering atypical pathogens (especially legionella in severe CAP), 
immunomodulation and also that combination therapy has been seen to reduce 
mortality in some studies. 
 The role of fluoroquinolones is well established in CAP and all western guidelines 
where the baseline prevalence of TB is low endorse them. However, in India where 
there is a high burden of TB and where TB may present as CAP, use of empiric 
fluoroquinolone therapy may lead to masking and delayed diagnosis of TB and 
promotion of drug resistance. Therefore, fluoroquinolines are best avoided. 
Similarly, drugs with anti-tubercular activity including linezolid and aminoglycosides 
should not be used.

<<<PAGE 45>>>
40 
 
 The empiric addition of oseltamivir should be considered in patients with CAP if there 
is an ongoing outbreak. 
 If CA MRSA is suspected than vancomycin/ teicoplanin may be added empirically 
(sputum cultures/ endotracheal aspirates have a high yield here); linezolid should be 
used only once the diagnosis is confirmed and TB is ruled out. 
 The duration of therapy in outpatients is 5 days. Therapy in hospitalized patients with 
CAP can be switched from parenteral to oral after clinical improvement and is 7 days. 
Patients can be considered for discharge if they are afebrile, accepting orally and 
hemodynamically stable for 48 hours. Longer duration of therapy should be 
considered in patients with bacteremic pneumococcal pneumonia, S. aureus 
pneumonia, Legionella pneumonia, lung abscess, empyema, pneumonia with enteric 
gram negative bacilli (Klebsiella) or non fermentative gram negative bacilli 
(Pseudomonas/ Acinetobacter) or if there is endocarditis/ meningitis complicating 
pneumonia. 
 CAP in children is classified as pneumonia, (age related tachypnea) severe pneumonia 
(tachypnea and recessions) and very severe pneumonia (severe pneumonia with 
hypoxemia, dullness or inability to drink). Severe or very severe pneumonia are 
ideally treated as inpatients. There is some data that severe CAP can also be treated on 
an outpatient basis in certain situations. No investigations including CXR are needed 
for outpatients. Blood cultures and CXR should be performed for inpatients. CBC and 
CRP may not always help differentiate bacterial from viral CAP. Other investigations 
to determine etiology are not routinely indicated. Empiric antimicrobial therapy is 
discussed in Table 2. Salient difference from adult CAP is the selective use of 
macrolides only if clinical features suggest mycoplasma. Complications such as 
empyema should be watched out. Duration of therapy for outpatients is 5 days and for 
uncomplicated pneumonia in inpatients is 7 days. 
 
Table 4.2: Choice of empiric antimicrobial therapy in adult CAP 
 Type of CAP 
Preferred drug 
Alternative 
Comments 
Outpatients without 
co-morbidities 
Co amoxiclav 
Macrolides** 
Cefuroxime 
Cefpodoxime 
Beta lactam preferred over 
macrolides due to high 
prevalence of macrolide 
resistance in S. pneumoniae in 
India. 
Doxycycline monotherapy not 
recommended 
Outpatients with 
co-morbidities* or 
use of antimicrobial 
in 3 months 
Co-amoxiclav 
and 
macrolide/doxycy
cline 
Cefuroxime/ 
cefpodoxime and 
macrolide/doxycycline 
 
Inpatient, non ICU 
Ceftriaxone with 
macrolide/doxycy
line 
Cefotaxime/ amox clav 
with 
macrolide/doxycycline 
If there is hypersensitivity to 
beta lactams: respiratory 
fluoroquinolones (exclude TB

<<<PAGE 46>>>
41 
 
first) 
 Inpatient ICU 
Ceftriaxone with 
macrolide/doxycy
cline 
Cefotaxime, 
piperacillin-tazobactam 
with macrolide 
 
Inpatient ICU with 
risk factors for 
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa/ other 
enteric gram 
negative bacteria# 
Piperacillin 
tazobactam/ 
macrolide/doxycy
cline 
Cefepime/imipenem 
with 
macrolide/doxycycline 
The use of carbapenems is 
preferred over beta lactam beta 
lactamase inhibitor 
combinations in patients with 
septic shock 
The empiric addition of oseltamivir in patients with CAP should be considered in the setting of an 
influenza outbreak 
If CA MRSA## is suspected then vancomycin or teicoplanin may be added 
 
*Chronic heart, liver, renal or lung disease, diabetes mellitus, malignancies, alcoholism 
or use of immunosuppressive drugs 
** Azithromycin/ Clarithromycin 
# Chronic respiratory disease (COPD, bronchiectasis, asthma, chronic bronchitis), 
neurologic disorders, enteral tube feeding and immunocompromised states. 
## Preceding influenza, cavitary infiltrates with no underlying aspiration, shock, 
empyemas 
 
4.3.4 Empyema 
 Empyema is a common complication of bacterial CAP. The common pathogens 
causing empyema include Pneumococcus, S. aureus, S. pyogenes and sometimes 
Klebsiella or other gram negative bacilli. It should be suspected if there is persistent 
fever, leukocytosis and effusion on the CXR. USG can be done to confirm the 
diagnosis. The pleural fluid should be tapped and if it is purulent/ has organisms on the 
gram stain or culture, empyema is confirmed. It should also be suspected in 
complicated para-pneumonic effusions (pH < 7.0/ sugar <40 mg/dl/ LDH> 1000 IU/l/ 
lactate > 45 mg/dl). 
 Drainage of the infected fluid is paramount and can be done by chest tube with or 
without fibrinolytics. VATS or thoracotomy may be needed in certain cases with 
organized empyema. 
 
Table 4.3: Antimicrobial therapy for Pediatric CAP 
 
Outpatient 
Inpatient 
Newborns < 1 month
Cefotaxime and gentamicin, add macrolides if Chlamydia 
suspected (afebrile, staccato cough) 
Age less than 5 years
Amoxicillin 
Co-amoxiclav 
Ceftriaxone 
Cefotaxime

<<<PAGE 47>>>
42 
 
Cefuroxime 
Co-amoxiclav 
Age more than 5 
years 
Amoxicillin 
Macrolide only if clinical 
features 
suggestive 
of 
mycoplasma 
Ceftriaxone 
Ampicillin 
Co-amoxiclav 
with/ without macrolide 
Suspected MRSA: add vancomycin/ teicoplanin /(linezolid only if TB ruled out) 
Suspected influenza: Add oseltamivir 
 
Table 4.4 : Drug doses, duration and route 
Drug 
Adult dose 
Pediatric dose 
Penicillin V 
500 mg twice daily 
250 mg twice daily 
Benzathine 
penicillin 
<27 kg 6,00,000 units IM single dose 
> 27 kg 1.2 million units IM single dose 
Amoxicillin 
500 – 1000 mg thrice daily (PO or 
IV) 
15-20 mg/kg twice daily oral 
30-35 mg/kg thrice daily IV 
Co-amoxiclav 
1 gm twice daily/ 625 mg thrice 
daily oral 
1.2 gm IVq8h 
15-20 mg/kg of amoxicillin 
twice daily PO 
25-30 mg/kg of amoxicillin 
component thrice daily IV 
Azithromycin 
500 mg daily (PO or IV) 
10 mg/kg once daily 
Clarithromycin
500 mg twice daily 
7.5 mg/kg twice daily 
Oseltamivir 
75 mg twice daily PO 
<15 kg 30 mg twice daily 
16-34 kg 45 mg twice daily 
35 -44 kg 60 mg twice daily 
45 kg and more 75 mg twice 
daily 
Doxycycline 
100 mg twice daily 
1.5-2 mg/kg twice daily 
Clindamycin 
300 mg four times a day PO 
600 mg thrice daily IV 
7 mg/kg thrice daily 
Cephalexin 
750 mg twice daily PO 
20 mg/kg twice daily PO 
Cefadroxil 
1 gm once daily 
30 mg/kg once daily 
Levofloxacin 
750 mg once daily PO or IV 
10-15 mg/kg in one or two 
divided doses PO or IV 
Moxifloxacin 
400 mg once daily PO or IV 
10 mg/kg once daily PO or IV 
Cefpodoxime 
200 mg twice daily 
5 mg/kg twice daily 
Cefuroxime 
500 mg twice daily oral 
1.5 gm twice daily IV 
10 mg/kg twice daily oral 
35 mg/kg twice daily IV 
Ceftriaxone 
2 gm once daily IV 
50 mg/kg twice daily 
Cefotaxime 
2 gm thrice daily IV 
30-35 mg/kg thrice daily IV 
Cefepime 
2 gm twice daily IV 
50 mg/kg twice daily 
Piperacillin 
tazobactam 
4.5 gm thrice daily 
100 mg/kg piperacillin thrice 
daily 
Cefoperazone 
sulbactam 
3 gm twice daily 
50 mg/kg of cefoperazone 
twice daily

<<<PAGE 48>>>
43 
 
Imipenem 
1 gm thrice daily or 500 mg four 
times daily IV 
15-25 mg/kg four times daily 
IV 
Meropenem 
1 gm thrice daily IV 
20-40 mg/kg thrice daily 
Vancomycin 
1 gm twice daily 
10 mg/kg four times daily 
Teicoplanin 
400 mg twice daily for 3 doses and 
then 400 mg once daily 
12 mg/kg twice daily for 3 
doses and then 12 mg/kg once 
daily 
Linezolid 
600 mg twice daily PO or IV 
10 mg/kg thrice daily PO or IV 
 
References 
1. Gupta D, Agarwal R, Aggarwal AN, Singh N, Mishra N, Khilnani GC et al (2012). Pneumonia 
Guidelines Working Group. Guidelines for diagnosis and management of community- and 
hospital-acquired pneumonia in adults: Joint ICS/NCCP(I) recommendations. Lung India 
29(Suppl 2):S27-62. 
2. Mandell LA, Wunderink RG, Anzueto A, Bartlett JG, Campbell GD, Dean NC et al (2007). 
Infectious Diseases Society of America/ American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the 
management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis 44(Suppl 2):S27–72. 
3. Jayaraman R, Varghese R, Kumar JL, Neeravi A, Shanmugasundaram D, Ralph R, Et al (2018). 
Invasive pneumococcal disease in Indian adults: 11 years' experience. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 
pii: S1684-1182(18)30113-0. 
4. Singh J, Sundaresan S, Manoharan A, Shet A (2017). Serotype distribution and antimicrobial 
susceptibility pattern in children≤5years with invasive pneumococcal disease in India - A 
systematic review. Vaccine 35(35 Pt B):4501-4509. 
5. Verghese VP, Veeraraghavan B, Jayaraman R, Varghese R, Neeravi A, Jayaraman Y et al (2017). 
Increasing incidence of penicillin- andcefotaxime-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae causing 
meningitis in India: Time for revision of treatment guidelines? Indian J Med Microbiol 
35(2):228-236. 
6. Shenoy PA, Chawla K, Vishwanath S, Shaw D (2016). Microbiological Characterization of 
Haemophilus influenzae Isolated from Patients with Lower Respiratory Tract Infections in a 
Tertiary Care Hospital, South India. J Clin Diagn Res10(5):DC31-4. 
7. Steinhoff MC (1998). Invasive Haemophilus influenzae disease in India: a preliminary report of 
prospective multihospital surveillance. IBIS (Invasive Bacterial Infections Surveillance) Group. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J 17(9Suppl):S172-5. 
8. Zoorob R, Sidani MA, Fremont RD, Kihlberg C (2012). Antibiotic use in acute upper respiratory 
tract infections. Am Fam Physician 86(9):817-22. 
9. Lieberthal AS, Carroll AE, Chonmaitree T, Ganiats TG, Hoberman A, Jackson MA, Joffe MD, 
Miller DT, Rosenfeld RM, Sevilla XD, Schwartz RH, Thomas PA, Tunkel DE (2013). The 
diagnosis and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics 131(3):e964-99. 
10. Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al (2012). Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 update by the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 55(10):e89. 
11. Chow AW, Benninger MS, Brook I, Brozek JL, Goldstein EJ, Hicks LA, Pankey GA, Seleznick 
M, Volturo G, Wald ER, File TM Jr (2012). Infectious Diseases Society of America. IDSA 
clinical practice guideline for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis in children and adults. Clin Infect Dis 
54(8):e72-e112.

<<<PAGE 49>>>
44 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. Dr. Tanu Singhal 
 
Consultant Pediatrics and Infectious Disease 
 
Kokilaben Dhirubhai Ambani Hospital and Medical Research Institute, Mumbai 
 
2. Dr. Pallab Ray 
 
Professor, Department of Medical Microbiology, 
 
PGIMER, Chandigarh

<<<PAGE 50>>>
45 
 
 
 CHAPTER: 5 
Management of Intra-abdominal Infections 
 
5.1 Classification 
Intra-abdominal infections are broadly classified as uncomplicated and complicated. 
Generally, if the infection remains confined to the viscus, it is considered uncomplicated 
and if infection spreads from the organ into the peritoneum causing localized or diffuse 
peritonitis, it is termed as complicated intra-abdominal infection. 
For the purpose of management of complicated intra-abdominal infections, take into 
consideration the suspected point of origin of infection, i.e., community acquired or 
healthcare associated infections and severity of infection. 
 Community acquired 
a. Mild to moderate severity 
b. High severity or high risk patients 
 Hospital acquired infections /Health care associated infections 
 
5.1.1 Disease Overview: 
Classification of bacterial peritonitis is based upon the source of the infectious bacteria. 
 
5.1.1.1 Primary or spontaneous peritonitis: refers to an extraperitoneal etiology, in 
which the infectious bacteria enter the peritoneal cavity through the circulatory or 
lymphatic system. In these cases, the patient usually has an underlying comorbidity that 
can lead to bacterial migration into the peritoneum. Such comorbidities may include 
ascites and indwelling peritoneal dialysis catheters. Primary peritonitis is estimated to 
occur in 10% to 30% of patients with alcoholic cirrhosis. Additionally, patients on 
chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) have, on average, one incidence of 
peritonitis every 33 months. 
 
5.1.1.2 Secondary peritonitis: this most common etiology is the result of infectious 
bacteria from a source within the peritoneum. Considering the plethora of microflora 
existing within the abdominal organs, migration of the bacteria from any of the organs 
into the sterile peritoneum can lead to an inflammatory response, resulting in secondary 
peritonitis. Dispersion of bacteria from their host organs may result from puncture due to 
trauma, surgery, or perforation. Ulceration, ischemia, or obstruction may cause the 
perforation of abdominal organs.

<<<PAGE 51>>>
46 
 
5.1.1.3 Tertiary peritonitis: is persistent or recurrent peritonitis that reappears at least 48 
hours after apparent resolution of a primary or secondary peritonitis. Data on the 
incidence of secondary and tertiary peritonitis are limited. Classification of peritonitis is 
useful in clinical practice as it can facilitate appropriate diagnosis and treatment. 
Since numerical scores for severity assessment may be as good as clinical judgement. 
One good guide may be as suggested in the Socie´ te´ franc¸aise d’anesthe´ sie et de 
re´animation (Sfar) guidelines would be presence of 2 or more of the following features 
 Hypotension attributed to sepsis 
 Serum lactic acid higher than the laboratory’s normal values 
 Diuresis < 0.5 ml/kg/h for more than 2 hours despite appropriate IV fluid therapy 
 PaO2/FiO2 ratio < 250 mmHg in the absence of pneumonia 
 Serum creatinine > 2 mg/dL (176.8 mmol/l) 
 Serum bilirubin > 2 mg/dL (34.2 mmol/l) 
 Thrombocytopenia < 100,000/mm 
 
In addition to this, it is important to identify patients who may be at a higher risk of 
treatment failure. Some of the identified risk factors at the time of admission are 
 High APACHE score 
 Immunocompromised /immunosuppressed state 
 In the Socie´ te´ franc¸aise d’anesthe´ sie et de re´animation (Sfar) guidelines 
would be presence of 2 or more of the following features 
-Prolonged hospital stay (> 5 days) 
-Prolonged preoperative antibiotic therapy (>2days) 
-diffuse peritonitis 
Acute pancreatitis constitutes a separate group by virtue of the nature of disease, 
progression and management. Broad principles of management of intra-abdominal 
infections include the following: 
 Early initiation of antimicrobials. While culture and sensitivity from intra-op cultures 
may not be essential for management of an individual case, it would help in 
formulating empiric antimicrobial policy, particularly for community acquired 
intraabdominal infection. For hospital acquired infection, culture and sensitivity 
testing may be useful for guiding empirical therapy. 
 For patients requiring hemodynamic support, fluid management should be initiated 
and done as needed. 
 Adequate source control is the backbone of management of patients with intra-
abdominal infections. Laparotomy, laparoscopy or percutaneous drainage as 
appropriate is various options for source control.

<<<PAGE 52>>>
47 
 
5.1.2 Organisms involved 
The commonly isolated organisms in IAI include facultative and aerobic Gram negative 
bacilli (E.coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, Proteus, Enterobacter spp), Gram positive 
aerobic cocci (Streptococcus species, Enterococcus fecalis, Enterococcus fecium) and 
anaerobes (Bacteriodes being isolated in most cases). Enterococcus may not be an 
important issue in cholangitis and cholecystitis. Candida species, usually Candida 
albicans are important healthcare associated pathogens in patients who have received 
antibiotics. 
 
5.1.3 Selecting an antibiotic regimen for empiric therapy 
 
For community acquired infections, the prevalence of enterobacteriaceae with 
extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL) is more than ten percent or in patients 
with severe infection, then it would be advisable to include a beta-lactam- beta-
lactamase inhibitor (BL-BLI) or a carbapenem in the regimen. If the prevalence is 
less than ten percent, then third generation cephalosporin may be used. For patients 
receiving third generation cephalosporins, additional administration of metronidazole 
would be needed. 
 
Double anaerobic cover is now recognized as a redundant practice world over. 
Empiric cover for Enterococcus, methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus or 
Candida is not necessary in patients with community acquired intra abdominal 
infection. 
 
For health care associated infections, the empiric regimen would largely be 
determined by the profile of organisms found in the hospital settings. A reasonable 
choice would be imipenem or meropenem (depending on the susceptibility pattern in 
hospital setting). Covering for enterococci may be needed for healthcare associated 
infections particularly for postoperative patients, immunosuppressed patients or those 
who have been on antibiotics which select out enterococci such as cephalosporins. 
 
In health care associated infections, carbapenem resistant gram negative organisms 
may be present and may need coverage. An intraoperative culture is usually of 
benefit in patients with healthcare associated infections. 
 
Empiric coverage for Candida may be needed in immunosuppressed patients, 
patients with perforated gastric ulcer on acid suppressants, presence of malignancy, 
recurrent intra-abdominal infection and if the intra-op cultures showing candida. 
Either an echinocandin or fluconazole can be used. 
 
5.1.4 Duration of therapy 
Therapy for complicated intra-abdominal infections should be continued till signs of 
infection have settled. In select cases a shorter duration of treatment may suffice such as 
– acute stomach and proximal jejunal perforations without malignancy receiving 
intervention for source control within 24 hours, bowel injury due to trauma that are

<<<PAGE 53>>>
48 
 
repaired within 12 hours, acute appendicitis sans abscess, perforation or peritonitis. 
Recently some data suggests that in those patients who are not severely ill and have 
achieved good source control a shorter duration of treatment may be as good (3-5 days). 
For healthcare associated infections, particularly with carbapenem resistant organisms, a 
longer duration (10-14 days) of treatment may be needed, assuming adequate source 
control and resolution of clinical symptoms and signs. 
For patients receiving antifungal treatment, generally 2 weeks of therapy may be needed, 
assuming adequate source control and resolution of clinical symptoms and signs. 
 
Table 5.1: Antibiotics regimen for various IAIs 
 
Conditions 
First Choice ABs 
Alternative 
Comments 
Community 
acquired 
intra-abdominal infection 
of 
mild 
to 
moderate 
severity 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
 
Community 
acquired 
intra-abdominal infection 
with high severity 
Imipenem 
or 
meropenem 
 
 
Healthcare 
associated 
intra-abdominal 
infections 
Imipenem/ 
Meropenem 
+ 
vancomycin 
 
Colistin, 
Tigecyline 
-Based on the findings of 
intra-operative cultures cover 
for Enterococcus may either 
be stopped or changed. If 
multi-drug resistant organism 
is 
isolated, 
based 
on 
susceptibility 
patterns, 
colistin, tigecyline may be 
used. 
-Echinocandins 
or 
fluconazole if risk factors for 
Candida. 
Infected 
pancreatic 
necrosis, 
pancreatic 
abscess 
Imipenem-cilastatin 
and vancomycin 
 
Therapy to be adjusted as per 
the culture and sensitivity 
results 
from 
pancreatic 
aspirate or necrosectomy. 
Antifungal 
cover 
with 
fluconazole, 
or 
echinocandins may be added 
if 
risk 
factors 
for 
disseminated candidiasis. 
For nosocomial infections, 
depending on the culture and 
sensitivity 
data, 
colistin/ 
tigecycline may be used. 
Cholangitis, cholecystitis 
As for community associated complicated intra-abdominal infections 
Liver Abscess 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
or 
piperacillin-
 
The treatment should be 
changed as per culture report 
and 
amoebic 
serology

<<<PAGE 54>>>
49 
 
tazobactam 
with 
metronidazole 
to 
cover for possible 
bacterial 
and 
amoebic etiology 
subsequently. 
 
 
5.2 Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis (SBP) 
 Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) refers to ascitic fluid infection with no 
recognizable source and occurs commonly in patients with cirrhosis. Among patients 
with ascites who were followed up for one year, SBP developed in 10-30% with an in-
hospital mortality rate of 20%. SBP results from translocation of bacteria from the 
intestinal lumen. 
 Risk factors associated with SBP include cirrhosis, ascitic fluid protein less than 1g/dl, 
total serum bilirubin greater than 2.5 mg/dl, variceal bleeding and a previous episode 
of SBP. 
 Indications for diagnostic peritoneal fluid aspiration to rule out SBP include 
emergency visit, hospital admission, local signs or symptoms of peritonitis (abdominal 
pain, vomiting, diarrhea, paralytic ileus), systemic signs and symptoms of infection 
(fever, hypotension, leukocytosis, acidosis, hypothermia), hepatic encephalopathy, 
renal failure and worsening liver function. 
 Diagnosis of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis requires an ascitic fluid absolute 
polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) count > 250 cells/mm3 and a positive ascitic 
fluid bacterial culture without an intra-abdominal surgically treatable source of 
infection. Culture-negative neutrocytic ascites refers to patients who have a PMN 
count of at least 250 cells / mm3 but with a negative bacterial culture in the absence of 
pancreatitis or recent receipt of antimicrobial therapy. 
 For an initial diagnostic paracentesis, other tests should be performed as clinically 
warranted on the remaining ascitic fluid which includes albumin, total protein, 
glucose, lactate dehydrogenase, amylase, and bilirubin. 
 Prior to administering antibiotics, ascitic fluid (at least 10 ml) should be obtained and 
then directly inoculated into a blood culture bottle at the bedside, instead of sending 
the fluid to the laboratory in a syringe or container. The practice of immediate 
inoculation in blood culture bottles improves the yield on bacterial culture from 
approximately 65 to 90%. Separate and simultaneous blood cultures should also be 
obtained, as up to 50% of patients with SBP have concomitant bacteremia. 
 It is important to distinguish SBP from secondary bacterial peritonitis because of the 
critical need to determine whether surgical intervention is needed. 
 Treatment: Empirical antibiotic therapy which targets the likely organisms must be 
initiated immediately after the diagnosis of SBP. SBP is usually caused by gram 
negative organisms, Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae. However, 
Staphylococcus, Enterococcus or Streptococcus may be implicated. Increasing

<<<PAGE 55>>>
50 
 
numbers of resistant bacteria in the community and multidrug resistant organisms 
(MDROs) in hospitals has complicated the empiric treatment of SBP. 
 Patients with advanced cirrhosis are highly susceptible to the development of 
infections caused by MDROs, because they require repeated hospitalizations, are often 
submitted to invasive procedures and are frequently exposed to antibiotics, either as 
prophylaxis or as treatment. 
 As the prevalence of ESBL in the community is more than 10%, we suggest using 
piperacillin/tazobactam or cefoperazone-sulbactam for the empiric management of 
SBP. For patients with a possibility of harboring multi-drug resistant organism 
imipenem or meropenem may be more reasonable. 
 Antibiotics should be tailored as per the culture and sensitivity data. 
 Patients with risk factors such as ascitic fluid protein concentration less than 1g/dl, 
variceal bleed or a history of SBP have benefited from prophylaxis with 
trimethroprim-sulfamethoxazole (one double strength tablet once daily), ciprofloxacin 
(500 mg b.i.d) or norfloxacin (400 mg o.d) in the western literature. However these 
antibiotics are unlikely to be useful for prophylaxis in India as the prevalence of 
resistance is >20% even for community acquired isolates, and may drive further 
resistance. 
 
Table 5.2: Antibiotics regimen for SBP 
 
Conditions 
First Choice ABs 
Alternative 
Comments 
Commonly caused 
by gram negative 
organisms, 
Escherichia 
coli 
and 
Klebsiella. 
Occasionally, 
Staphylococcus, 
Enterococcus 
or 
Streptococcus may 
be implicated. 
Piperacillin/tazobactam 
or 
cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
For 
multi-drug 
resistant organism 
imipenem 
or 
meropenem may 
be 
more 
reasonable. 
 
Antibiotics should 
be tailored as per 
the culture and 
sensitivity data. 
 
 
Reference: 
1. Solomkin Js, Mazuski JE, Bradley Js, et al. Diagnosis and management of complicated intra-
abdominal infection in adults and children: guidelines by the surgical Infection society and the 
Infectious diseases society of america.surg Infect (larchmt); 2010; 11(1):79-109. 
2. Montravers P, Dupont H, Leone M, Constantin J-M , Constantin J-M, Mertes P-M, et al. 
Guidelines for management of intra-abdominal infections. Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 
2015;34:117-30

<<<PAGE 56>>>
51 
 
3. Sartelli M, Catena M, Abu-Zidan FM , Ansaloni L ,. Biffl WL, Boermeester MA. Management of 
intra-abdominal infections: Recommendations by WSES 2016 Consensus Conference. World J 
Emerg Surg;2017:12:1-31 
4. Peoples JB. Candida and perforated peptic ulcers. Surgery 1986; 100:758–64. 
5. Calandra T, Bille J, Schneider R, Mosimann F, Francioli P. Clinical significance of Candida 
isolated from peritoneum in surgical patients.Lancet 1989; 2:1437–40. 
6. Sawyer RG, Claridge JA, Nathens AB, Rotstein OD, Duane TM, Evans HL, et al. Trial of short-
course antimicrobial therapy for intraabdominal infection. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1996–2005 
7. Herzog T, Chromik AM, Uhl W. Treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections in the era 
of multi-drug resistant bacteria. Eur J Med Res 2010; 15: 525-532 
8. Angeli Paolo, EASL Clinical Practice guidelines for the management of patients with 
decompensated cirrhosis. Journal of Hepatology 2018; 69:406-60. 
9. Dever JB, Sheikh MY. Review article: spontaneous bacterial peritonitis--bacteriology, diagnosis, 
treatment, risk factors and prevention. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2015;41:1116-31. 
10. Runyon BA. American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) Practice Guidelines 
Committee. Management of Adult Patients with Ascites Due to Cirrhosis: Update 2012. 
 
5.3 Acute Diarrhea 
5.3.1 Introduction 
Every year over ten million cases and over 1000 deaths are reported due to diarrhoea in India. 
The diarrheal diseases represent one of the five leading causes of death worldwide and are the 
second leading cause of death in children under five years of age. 
 
5.3.2 Definition 
Diarrhea is defined as the passage of loose or watery stools, typically at least three times in a 24-
hour period [3]. Acute diarrhea is defined as diarrhea of ≤14 days in duration, in contrast to 
persistent (>14 days and ≤30 days) or chronic (>30 days) diarrhea. 
 
Table 5.3 Types of Acute Diarrhea 
Acute watery diarrhea 
Acute bloody diarrhea 
In 
a 
non-epidemic 
situation, 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (E. coli). 
Epidemic disease; Vibrio cholera 
seasonal 
out 
breaks: 
Norovirus, Campylobacter species, 
nontyphoidal Salmonellae, Aeromonas species, 
and enteroaggregative. 
E. coli, Giardia lamblia 
Shigella species, particularly Shigella flexneri, 
are the most important. 
Other causes include Campylobacter jejuni, 
enteroinvasive and enterohemorrhagic E. coli, 
nontyphoidal Salmonella 
species, Entamoeba 
histolytica.

<<<PAGE 57>>>
52 
 
 
5.3.3 Clinical features- 
 The onset, duration, severity, and frequency of diarrhea should be noted, with particular 
attention to stool character (e.g., watery, bloody, mucus-filled, purulent, bilious). 
 The patient should be evaluated for signs of dehydration, including decreased urine 
output, thirst, dizziness, and change in mental status. 
 Vomiting is more suggestive of viral illness or illness caused by ingestion of a preformed 
bacterial toxin. 
 Symptoms more suggestive of invasive bacterial (inflammatory) diarrhea include fever, 
tenesmus, and grossly bloody stool. 
 A "rice-water" appearance of stool flecked with mucous is suggestive of cholera. 
Furthermore, diarrhea caused by V. cholera may present very suddenly with vomiting and 
abdominal cramping but not frank pain or tenesmus. Fever is uncommon in cholera. 
In contrast, shigellosis is typically characterized by the frequent passage of small liquid stools 
that contain visible blood, with or without mucous. 
 Abdominal cramps and tenesmus are common, along with fever and anorexia. Infection 
with Entameba histolytica presents with frequent passage of small liquid stools that 
contain visible blood and mucous associated with tenesmus. 
 Occasionally candida species may be the causative agent for diarrhea. 
 Symptoms ascribed to Candida-associated diarrhea in the literature include prolonged 
secretory diarrhea with abdominal pain and cramping but without blood, mucus, fever, 
nausea, or vomiting. 
 Non infective causes of diarrhea must be explored in case of chronic diarrhoea. 
The physical exam should focus on characterizing the degree of volume depletion: 
 Early hypovolemia – signs and symptoms may be absent 
 Moderate hypovolemia – thirst, restless or irritable behavior, decreased skin turgor, 
sunken eyes 
 Severe hypovolemia – diminished consciousness, lack of urine output, cool moist 
extremities, rapid and feeble pulse, low or undetectable blood pressure, peripheral 
cyanosis 
 
5.3.4 Diagnostic testing 
 Because most watery diarrhea is self-limiting, testing is usually not indicated in general. 
 A stool culture is indicated if the patient has grossly bloody stool, severe dehydration, 
signs of inflammatory disease, symptoms lasting more than three to seven days, or is 
immunuosuppressed [6]. 
 Routine microscopy of fresh stool is inexpensive and can identify the presence of 
numerous fecal leukocytes, suggesting an invasive bacterial infection. 
Microscopic evidence of Entamoeba trophozoites containing red blood cells provides sufficient 
basis for treating for amoebic dysentery instead of shigellosis. Notably, finding cysts or

<<<PAGE 58>>>
53 
 
trophozoites without red blood cells in a bloody stool does not indicate that Entamoeba is the 
cause of illness, since asymptomatic infection is frequent among healthy persons. 
5.3.5 Treatment 
Adequate fluid and electrolyte replacement and maintenance are essential to the management of 
diarrheal illness Rehydration. 
None to moderate hypovolemia — can be effectively treated with oral rehydration solution 
(ORS). An improved, reduced osmolarity. ORS solution, containing 75 mEq/L of sodium and 
75 mmol/L of glucose. 
Severe hypovolemia- should receive intravenous fluids. Ringer’s lactate is preferred, but normal 
saline can also be used.( Normal saline is less preferable because it does not contain potassium to 
replace losses nor a base to correct acidosis). 
 Antimicrobial therapy is not typically indicated for the treatment of acute watery diarrhea 
in adults. An important exception is the treatment of severe cholera in outbreak settings, 
for which antibiotics can decrease the duration of illness and the volume of fluid losses. 
 The use of probiotics or prebiotics for the treatment of acute diarrhea in adults is not 
recommended, except in cases of postantibiotic-associated illness. 
 In patients receiving antibiotics for traveler’s diarrhea, adjunctive loperamide therapy can 
be administered to decrease duration of diarrhea and increase chance for a cure [7]. 
Loperamide should be avoided in dysentery. 
 In contrast to the treatment of watery diarrhea, adults with bloody diarrhea should be 
treated promptly with an antimicrobial that is effective against Shigella. Antibiotics 
reduced the duration of diarrhea and fever in infections caused by Shigella, which is the 
most common cause of dysentery in resource-limited settings and can otherwise be 
associated with severe complications. 
 Stool microscopy and cultures has to be sent routinely in dysentery syndromes and 
antibiotics should be selected based on the microscopy and sensitivity testing. 
Table 5.4 Antibiotic Treatment for Diarrhea 
Suspected Cause 
Antibiotic 
V. Cholerae 
Doxycycline (Not recommended in children and pregnant 
women) 300mg once 
Azithromycin 1 g as a single dose 
Shigella 
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg b.d for 3days 
Alternatively, Ceftriaxone 2g i.v as single dose 
Amoebiasis 
Metronidazole 500 mg t.i.d for 5 days 
Giardiasis 
Metronidazole 250 mg t.i.d for 5 days 
Campylobacter 
Azithromycin 500 mg for 3days 
Aeromonas 
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg b.i.d for 3days 
Alternatively, 
Norfloxacin 400 mg, b.i.d for 3 days

<<<PAGE 59>>>
54 
 
*The antibiotic of choice is Flouroquinolones or Azithromycin. Ampicillin or TMP-SMX are no longer 
drugs of choice in India in view of high resistance. As the resistance of shigella to Azithromycin and 
cefixime is nearing 20 percent. 
 
References 
1. Government of India, National Health Profile 2011 (Jan-Dec.), DGHS, Central Bureau of Health 
Intelligence, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi; 2011. 
2. Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, et al. Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death 
for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2010. Lancet 2012; 380:2095. 
3. Guerrant RL, Van Gilder T, Steiner TS, et al. Practice guidelines for the management of 
infectious diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 32:331. 
4. Harris JB, La Rocques RC, Qadri F, Ryan ET, Calderwood SB. Cholera. Lancet 2012; 379:2466-
2476. 
5. Stoll BJ, Glass RI, Huq MI, et al. Epidemiologic and clinical features of patients infected with 
Shigella who attended a diarrheal disease hospital in Bangladesh. J Infect Dis 1982; 146:177. 
6. Manatsathit S, Dupont HL, Farthing M, et al.; Working Party of the Program Committee of the 
Bangkok World Congress of Gastroenterology 2002. Guideline for the management of acute 
diarrhea in adults. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2002;17(suppl):S54–S71. 
7. Mark S. Riddle, Herbert L. DuPont,et al. ACG Clinical Guideline: Diagnosis, Treatment, and 
Prevention of Acute Diarrheal Infections in Adults. Am J Gastroenterol 2016; 111:602–622. 
8. Christopher PR, David KV, John SM, Sankarapandian V. Antibiotic therapy for Shigella 
dysentery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; :CD006784 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. 
Dr.MVS. Subbalaxmi 
Additional Professor 
Dept of general medicine 
Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Hyderabad, Telangana. 
 
2. Dr Nusrat Shafiq Khan 
Professor 
Department of Pharmacology 
PGIMER, Chandigarh. 
 
3. Dr P. Vishnu Rao 
Consultant, 
Department of Infectious diseases, 
Yashoda hospital, Hyderabad

<<<PAGE 60>>>
55 
 
CHAPTER: 6 
Management of Skin and Soft Tissue Infections 
 
6.1 Introduction 
Skin and soft-tissue infections (SSTIs) include infections of the skin, subcutaneous tissue, 
fascia, and muscle. They can present with a wide spectrum of clinical presentations, 
ranging from simple cellulitis to rapidly progressive necrotizing fasciitis. The major 
challenge lies in the diagnosis of the exact extent of the disease to institute appropriate 
management. 
 
6.2 Definitions 
6.2.1 Cellulitis: Cellulitis is an acute spreading infection that involves subcutaneous 
tissue; most commonly caused by Group A Streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus. 
Trauma, underlying skin lesions and spread from adjacent infections such as 
osteomyelitis can lead to the development of cellulitis. Clinically rapidly intensifying 
pain and redness is a common presentation. Fever and lymphadenopathy may be present. 
The borders in cellulitis are not well demarcated. Rarely organisms like H. influenza and 
Pneumococcus may also cause cellulitis. 
6.2.2 Furunculosis: Furunculosis is a deep infection of the hair follicle leading to 
abscess formation with an accumulation of pus and necrotic tissue. Furuncles appear as 
red, swollen, and tender nodules on hair-bearing parts of the body. The most common 
infectious agent is S. aureus, but other bacteria may also be causative. Furunculosis often 
tends to be recurrent and may spread among family members. 
6.2.3 Carbuncle: It is a coalescence of several inflamed follicles into a single 
inflammatory mass with purulent drainage from multiple follicles. 
6.2.4 Erysipelas: It is characterized by abrupt onset of fiery red swelling of the face or 
extremities. The distinctive features of erysipelas are well defined indurated margins, 
particularly along the naso-labial fold, rapid progression and intense pain. The most 
common cause of erysipelas is beta-haemolytic streptococci. 
6.2.4 Necrotizing fasciitis: Necrotizing fasciitis is an infection of the deep soft tissues 
that result in progressive destruction of the muscle fascia and the overlying subcutaneous 
fat. This condition is notorious for rapid progression. Early and aggressive surgical 
debridement and treatment with appropriate antibiotics are important to reduce mortality.

<<<PAGE 61>>>
56 
 
Table 6.1: Antibiotics guidelines for skin and soft-tissue infections (SSTIs) 
Condition 
Organism 
Antibiotic 
Duration 
Comments 
Cellulitis 
S.pyogenes 
S.aureus 
 
Cefazolin 
Or cephalexin Or 
Amoxicillin-
clavulanate 
+/- Clindamycin 
5-7 
days 
(longer 
if 
clinically 
indicated) 
-Obtain blood/ pus 
cultures 
before 
starting antibiotics 
-Consider 
poly-
microbial pathogens 
in diabetics 
-Consider risk factors 
for 
MRSA 
and 
presence 
of 
TSS 
before 
using 
clindamycin 
Necrotizing 
fasciitis 
S. pyogenes 
S.aureus, 
anaerobes, 
Gram 
negative organisms 
(polymicrobial) 
 
 Piperacillin-
tazobactam + 
 Clindamycin 
Generally, 
14 days if 
adequate 
source 
control 
achieved 
Early 
surgical 
debridement essential 
Send 
blood 
and 
intraoperative 
specimens 
for 
bacterial cultures. 
Consider use of IVIG 
for 
streptococcal 
NF/TSS 
Necrotizing 
fasciitis 
Aeromonas/ 
V.vulnificus 
(suspect 
when 
history of exposure 
to fresh water or 
salt 
water 
respectively) 
Ciprofoxacin + 
Doxycycline 
Generally, 
14 days if 
adequate 
source 
control 
achieved 
 
Erysipelas 
Propionibacterium 
acnes/MSSA 
Amoxicillin-
clavulanate 
5-7 days 
 
Abscess 
S. 
pyogenes,
Oral anaerobes 
 
Clindamycin OR 
Ampicillin-
sulbactum 
ORAmoxicillin-
clavulanate 
5-7 days 
 
S.aureus, 
facultative gram 
negative anaerobes 
Linezolid 
OR 
Vancomycin 
PLUS 
Ciprofloxacin 
Generally, 
14 days

<<<PAGE 62>>>
57 
 
Table 6.2: LRINEC (Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis) Score (>6 
favours NF): 
Parameter 
Units 
Score 
CRP 
mg/dL 
 
<15 
 
0 
≥15 
 
4 
 
WBC 
cells/mm3
 
<15000 
 
0 
15000-25000 
 
1 
>25000 
 
2 
 
Hemoglobin 
g/dL 
 
>13.5 
 
0 
11-13.5 
 
1 
<11 
 
2 
 
Sodium 
mmol/dL 
 
≥135 
 
0 
<135 
 
2 
 
Creatinine 
mg/dL 
 
≤1.6 
 
0 
>1.6 
 
2 
 
Glucose 
mg/dL 
 
≤180 
 
0 
>180 
 
1 
 
 
Table 6.3: Clinical signs which favour NF>cellulitis 
Symptoms 
General examination 
High grade fever 
Toxic look 
Delirium 
Hypotension 
Lethargy 
Tachycardia 
Severe pain disproportionate to 
clinical signs 
Pallor 
Limb examination 
Skip areas (Areas of normal skin 
surrounded by infection) 
Edema/tenderness extending beyond the cutaneous 
erythema 
Dishwater-like pus discharge 
Probe sign* positive 
Hypoesthesia over the skin 
Bullous lesions 
Crepitus 
Skin necrosis/ecchymoses 
Wooden hard induration of subcutaneous tissue extending beyond the area of apparent skin 
involvement 
*: After infiltrating the involved area, a 2 cm incision is made down to the deep fascia. Gentle probing is 
performed with a blunt instrument or index finger and if the tissue dissects with minimal resistance, then 
probe test is considered to be positive.

<<<PAGE 63>>>
58 
 
6.3 Deep neck space infections 
6.3.1 Introduction 
Deep neck space infections usually arise from an infected dental source or the tonsils, 
parotid gland, deep cervical lymph nodes, middle ear, or sinuses. They often progress 
rapidly and may develop a life-threatening complication. Thus, clinicians must be aware 
of such infections and should not underestimate their potential extent or severity. 
6.3.2 Principles of management 
Adequate antibiotics with surgical source control in case of loculated collections are 
essential for successful management of these infections. 
Patients with risk factors for MRSA infection should be treated empirically with linezolid 
(600 mg orally or IV every 12 hours) or vancomycin (15 to 20 mg/kg IV every 12 hours). 
Risk factors for MRSA include a history of healthcare exposure, indwelling lines/ 
devices, intravenous drug use, co-morbid disease (e.g., diabetes mellitus, CKD on 
dialysis), prior history of MRSA infection and residing in a community or hospital where 
there is a substantial incidence of MRSA. 
 
Table 6.4: Antibiotics guidelines for deep neck space infections 
 
Site of infection 
Organisms 
Immunocompetent 
Immunosuppressed 
 
Peri-tonsillar 
abscess (Quinsy) 
S.pyogenes, 
Oral anaerobes 
Clindamycin OR 
Ampicillin-sulbactum 
ORAmoxicillin-
clavulanate 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
Suppurative 
parotitis 
Streptococci, oral 
anaerobes 
 
Clindamycin OR 
Ampicillin-sulbactumOR 
Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
plusClindamycin 
Note:Urgent ENT reference in case of obstructed 
salivary duct 
Ludwig’s angina
Streptococci, oral 
anaerobes 
Clindamycin 
 OR 
Ampicillin-sulbactum OR 
Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
 Plus 
Clindamycin 
Odontogenic 
Viridians and other 
streptococci, 
Peptostreptococcus 
and 
other 
oral 
anaerobes 
Clindamycin OR 
Ampicillin-sulbactum OR 
Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
 Plus 
Clindamycin 
Rhinogenic 
S.pneumoniae, 
H.influenzae, 
streptococci, 
anaerobes 
Ceftriaxone + linezolid 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
+ Clindamycin 
Otologic 
S.pneumoniae, 
H.influenzae, 
streptococci, 
Ceftriaxone Plus 
Metronidazole 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
+ Clindamycin

<<<PAGE 64>>>
59 
 
anaerobes 
Prevertebral 
abscess 
S.aureus, 
facultative gram 
negative anaerobes 
Linezolid 
ORVancomycin PLUS 
Ciprofloxacin 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
+ Clindamycin 
Lemierre 
syndrome (Septic 
jugular 
thrombophlebitis)
Fusobacterium 
necrophorum, 
Streptococcus, 
anaerobes 
 Piperacillin-tazobactam 
 Plus 
Clindamycin 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
 Plus 
Clindamycin 
 
#Enterobacteriaceae must be considered as potential pathogens in immunosuppressed 
hosts (neutropenics, diabetics, critically ill, postoperative infections & trauma) 
**Drainage of abscess/ collection where possible should be carried out 
 
 
Table 6.5: Standard doses of antimicrobials for SSTIs 
 
Antibiotics 
Doses, duration and route of administration 
Cefazolin 
 
1-2 g IV q8h
Cephalexin
750 mg bd, 500 mg TID 
Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
Oral: 1g bd/ IV 1.2gm TDS 
Clindamycin
600-900 IV 8hourly
Piperacillin-tazobactam + 
Clindamycin 
IV 4.5 gm 6 hourly (P-T) + IV 600 mg TDS (Clinda)
Ciprofoxacin 
IV 750 mg q12h
Doxycycline 
IV200 mg stat f/b 100 mg 1-0-1
Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
1g bd
 
 
Table 6.6: Standard doses of antimicrobials for Deep neck space infections 
 
Antibiotics 
Doses, duration and route of administration 
 
Clindamycin 
600 mg 6-8 hourly for 2-3 weeks 
Ampicillin-sulbactum 
3 gm 6 hourly
Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
1.2 g 8 hourly (for Peri-tonsillar abscess)
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
4.5 gm 6-8 hourly 2-3 weeks
Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
625 mg 8 hourly
Ceftriaxone 
1gm 12 hourly
Linezolid
600 mg 12 hourly
Metronidazole 
500 mg 8 hourly
Vancomycin 
15 mg/kg 12 hourly
Gentamicin or 
1.7 mg/kg IV Q 8 h 
Tobramycin 
5 mg/kg IV Q 24 h 
Ciprofloxacin
400 mg IV Q 12 h

<<<PAGE 65>>>
60 
 
References: 
1. Wong CH, Khin LW, Heng KS, et al. The LRINEC (Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing 
Fasciitis) score: a tool for distinguishing necrotizing fasciitis from other soft tissue infections. Crit 
Care Med 2004; 32:1535. 
2. Stevens BL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF et al. Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Skin and Soft Tissue Infections: 2014 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. Dr.Purva Mathur 
 Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine 
 JPN Apex Trauma Center, 
AIIMS, New Delhi 
 
2. Dr. Ayesha J. Sunavala 
Consultant - Infectious Diseases 
P.D. Hinduja Hospital & Medical Research Centre, Mumbai 
 
3. Dr.Umang Agrawal 
FNB Fellow [Infectious Diseases] 
P.D. Hinduja Hospital & Medical Research Centre, Mumbai 
 
4. Dr. Samarth Mittal 
 Assistant professor, orthopedics, 
JPNA trauma center 
AIIMS. New Delhi

<<<PAGE 66>>>
61 
 
CHAPTER: 7 
Management of Bone and Joint Infections 
 
7.1 OSTEOMYELITIS 
 
7.1.1. Introduction 
 Osteomyelitis is an infection of the bone. 
 Osteomyelitis is characterized by sequestra formation. 
 
7.1.2 Classification 
7.1.2.1 Based on the duration of illness – 
a) Acute osteomyelitis (days-weeks) 
 Absence of sequestra 
b) Chronic osteomyelitis (months-years) 
 Presence of sequestra&/or sinus tract 
 
7.1.2.2 Based on the mechanism of infection 
 
 a) Contiguous e.g Trauma, soft tissue infection, decubitus ulcer 
 b) Hematogenous– Most often affects long bones and vertebral bones 
 c) Vascular insufficiency e.g Diabetes mellitus 
7.1.2.3 Based on anatomical stage and host factors -Cierny-Mader staging system 
 
Table 7.1: Classification of Osteomyelitis 
 
Cieny- Mader staging system –Anatomic and Physiologic 
Anatomic stage 
Anatomic type 
1 
Medullary 
2 
Superficial 
3 
Localized 
4 
Diffused 
Physiologic host 
Physiologic type 
A 
Normal host 
Bs 
Systemic compromise 
BI 
Local compromise 
Bis 
Systemic compromise and local compromise 
C 
Treatment worse than the disease

<<<PAGE 67>>>
62 
 
 
7.1.3 Common organisms causing osteomyelitis 
 Hematogenous osteomyelitis is usually monobacterial, Contiguous osteomyelitis 
may be polymicrobial. 
 Staphylococcus aureus, Enterobacter species, Streptococcus species, Pseudomonas 
species, gram negative bacilli. 
 
7.1.4 Clinical features 
 Diagnosis of osteomyelitis should be based on clinical presentation. 
 Symptoms can be vague, pain over the site of infection being the most common 
symptom. 
 Typical signs and symptoms of infection like fever, swelling, and tenderness are 
uncommon. 
 Draining sinus tract may be present over infected bone. 
 Osteomyelitis following fracture may present with fracture non union. 
 Vertebral osteomyelitis can cause cord compression. 
 “Probe to bone” test is useful bed side test for diagnosis of osteomyelitis especially 
in the diabetic foot. 
 
7.1.5 Investigations 
7.1.5.1 Blood investigations: 
 
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are often 
abnormal. 
 
White blood cell count can be normal or elevated and anaemia can be a feature of 
chronic osteomyelitis. 
 
Investigations directed towards identification of systemic illness like blood sugars, 
renal and liver function tests should be done. 
 
7.1.5.2 Radiology : 
 
X-ray should be first radiological investigation for a suspected case of 
osteomyelitis even though is it insensitive test for acute osteomyelitis. However, 
X-ray finding will be positive in the majority of patients with chronic 
osteomyelitis. Common finding includes osteopenia, periostitis and Brodie 
abscess. 
 
Contrast enhanced MRI is the most sensitive and specific radiological 
investigation for both acute and chronic osteomyelitis. 
 
Tracer scan with Tc99 or Gallium 67 citrate has high sensitivity for the diagnosis 
of acute osteomyelitis in non traumatized bone. 
 
F-Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron emission tomography (PET) scan can be used if 
MRI is contraindicated as it has high diagnostic accuracy.

<<<PAGE 68>>>
63 
 
7.1.5.3 Cultures: 
 Preferable to collect specimen prior to initiation of therapy and only from wounds 
that are clinically infected. In case the patient is currently on antibiotics which 
appear to be ineffective it is advisable to discontinue for 1-2 weeks if possible. 
Use standard techniques to collect sample. 
 Swab cultures and sinus tract cultures may be unreliable 
 Container: Sterile screw-capped container / sterile swabs in the screw capped tubes 
 A swab from wounds: (generally discouraged as they often grow skin colonizers) 
 -Collect swabs only when tissue or aspirate cannot be obtained. 
 -Sinus tract 
 Samples should be collected using a syringe and needle. 
 It should be placed in a sterile container. 
 A portion of the sample should also be placed in a sterile tube containing 
anaerobic medium like RCM if an anaerobic culture is required. 
 -Blood culture 
 Blood culture should be obtained along with wound and bone culture for all 
patients presenting with acute Osteomyelitis. 
 
7.1.6 Management 
A brief approach to management has been shown in the flowchart below. 
(Details of epidemiology & directed antibiotic choices have been discussed in the section 
on management of B&J Infections.) 
 
In the chart: Placement of antibiotic beads depending on the organism that is suspected or 
detected earlier

<<<PAGE 69>>>
64 
 
Fig. 7.1 Approach to management of osteomyelitis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7.2 Joint Infections 
Infection of the joint can occur in native joint or prosthetic joint. 
 
7.2.1 Septic arthritis of native joint 
 
7.2.1.1 Introduction 
 Infection of native joint is most often due to bacteremia, occasionally can also 
result due to direct injury to joint e.g Trauma, therapeutic joint injections. 
 Most common bacteria causing septic arthritis are gram positive, Staphylococcus 
aureus being the commonest. gram negative septic arthritis is seen in the setting 
of gastrointestinal or urogenital bacteremia. 
 
7.2.1.2 Risk factors 
1) Previously damaged joint 
 Rheumatoid arthritis 
 Gout Osteoarthritis 
 Recent joint surgery 
2) Diabetes mellitus 
 
3)Intravenous drug abuse 
4) Cirrhosis 
5) Chronic kidney disease 
6) Steroids 
7) Skin diseases like Psoriasis

<<<PAGE 70>>>
65 
 
7.2.1.3 Clinical features 
 Classic symptoms include acute onset high grade fever with tender swollen joint. 
Classic symptoms may be masked if the patient is NSAID’s or immunosuppressive 
drugs like steroids. 
 The knee joint is the most common site for septic arthritis. Hip, ankle and elbow 
joints can also be involved. 
 Gonococcal or pneumococcal septic arthritis can be polyarticular. 
 
7.2.1.4 Investigations 
 Leucocytosis, high ESR and CRP are features of septic arthritis. 
 Synovial fluid from the infected joint should send for WBC counts, gram stain, and 
culture before starting antibiotics. 
 In septic arthritis synovial WBC counts are more 50000 cells /mm3. 
 Blood cultures should be obtained for all suspected cases of septic arthritis before 
starting antibiotics. 
 Radiology of infected joint in early stages will show periarticular soft tissue 
swelling, fat pad oedema with normal periarticular bone. As the infection worsens 
loss of joint space, periarticular osteoporosis and periosteal reaction will happen. 
CT and MRI are very sensitive techniques to pick up early changes of septic 
arthritis. 
 Ultrasound is not only useful for assessing the amount of joint effusion but also to 
guide synovial fluid aspiration. 
 
7.2.1.5 Prosthetic joint infection (PJI) 
 Prosthetic joint infection is the worst complication of joint replacement surgeries. 
 Presence of biofilm on prosthesis makes diagnosis and treatment of prosthetic joint 
infections very challenging. 
 
7.2.2 Definition of prosthetic joint infection by infectious disease society of America 
(IDSA), 2012 
PJI is present when one of the following criteria is present: 
 Sinus tract communicating with a prosthesis 
 Presence of pus 
 Acute inflammation on histopathologic evaluation of periprosthetic tissue 
 Two or more positive cultures with the same organism (intraoperatively and/or 
preoperatively) 
 Single positive culture with the virulent organism.

<<<PAGE 71>>>
66 
 
Type of infection Time of PJI 
Likely Source of infection 
Early 
Less than 3 months 
Intraoperative 
Delayed 
3-12 months 
Intraoperative 
Late 
More than 12 months 
Haematogenous or Intraoperative 
 
7.2.3 Clinical presentation 
• Clinical presentation of PJI is based on time of implantation, organism 
virulence, and host immunity. 
• A detail history and examination will not only help in choosing appropriate 
investigation but also its interpretation. 
• Joint pain and signs of joint inflammation are features of PJI. 
• Presence of sinus almost always suggests PJI. 
 
7.2.4 Common organism: 
• Staphylococcus aureus- common in western literature 
• Coagulase-negative Staphylococci common in western literature 
• Enterococci 
• Gram negative aerobic bacilli quite common in the Indian setting 
• Propionibacterium acnes for shoulder 
 
7.2.5 Investigations 
7.2.5 Preoperative 
 Total counts, ESR (>30) and CPR (>10). If ESR and CRP are normal PJI is 
unlikely. 
 Synovial fluid cell counts with percentage of polymorphonuclear (PMN) leucocyte 
and synovial culture have a high sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of 
septic arthritis and PJI. Cut off values for cells and % of PMN cells for diagnosis of 
PJI is based on the joint & time after surgery. 
 
7.2.5.2 Intraoperative 
 
At least 3 and optimally 5-6 samples of periprosthetic tissue must be obtained for: 
a. Histopathology of periprosthetic tissue. 
b. Periprosthetic tissue/pus culture. 
c. Sonication of the prosthetic implant will detect biofilm organisms &improve 
microbiological yield especially in patients with prior receipt of antimicrobials. 
 
Molecular methods and synovial fluid biomarkers are newer diagnostic modalities 
for culture negative PJI.

<<<PAGE 72>>>
67 
 
7.2.6 Management 
A brief approach to management has been shown in the flowchart below. 
(Details of epidemiology & directed antibiotic choices have been discussed in the section 
on management of B&J Infections.) 
IV treatment has been traditionally recommended, however switching to oral treatment 
after 2 weeks in selected cases appears to be equally successful 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.2 Approach to management of septic arthritis 
7.2.7 Management of Bone & Joint infections 
 
7.2.7.1 Principles of management of Bone & Joint (B&J) infections: 
 
a. Cure in the first attempt is essential for B&J infections. Each episode of treatment 
failure leads to significant tissue damage and loss of functional integrity. 
b. The cure is defined as long-term, pain free functional joint/limb with complete 
eradication of infection. This requires a combination of an appropriate surgical 
procedure and long-term directed antimicrobials. (Although this is an 
antimicrobial guideline, we have included and emphasized on appropriate 
surgical debridement with removal of implants if possible, as this is an integral 
part of the successful management of B&J infections).

<<<PAGE 73>>>
68 
 
c. The most important consideration in the management of bone & joint infections is 
the presence of biofilm associated with implants and prosthesis. The implications 
of biofilm formation are: 
 Antibiotic penetration into biofilm is poor 
 Antibiotics that penetrate may not act on biofilm organisms (non-replicating, 
stationary phase) 
 Biofilm organisms are protected from immune processes like phagocytosis 
 Biofilm organisms can acquire resistance patterns from one another 
 
Hence, the antimicrobial regimen used to treat B&J infections should have the following 
properties: 
a. Bactericidal drugs are preferred for deep seated infections e.g. osteomyelitis 
b. Agents with good bone penetration 
c. Drugs with biofilm activity (penetration into biofilm, action against biofilm 
organisms) 
d. Least toxic and most affordable regimen should be used in view of prolonged 
duration of treatment 
The use of local antibiotic cement spacer/antibiotic impregnated beads is a useful 
adjunctive treatment option along with systemic antibiotics, especially in drug resistant, 
difficult to treat B&J infections. It provides high concentrations of the drug locally which 
elute over a period of days-weeks, without increasing systemic toxicity. 
 
7.2.7.2 Empiric management of B&J infections 
Patients with B&J infections, especially chronic osteomyelitis and implant-associated 
infections often undergo multiple incomplete procedures and receive several courses of 
empiric antibiotics. 
Whereas this practice should be strongly discouraged and every attempt should be made 
at a tissue diagnosis, fashioning empiric treatment based on the most likely cause is 
sometimes inevitable when cultures fail to isolate the organism or the patient is clinically 
unstable. 
 
If ongoing/ recent receipt of empiric antimicrobials, surgery may be deferred for ≥ 2 
weeks (antibiotic-free interval), to increase diagnostic yield in a stable patient. 
 
The likely organisms may be predicted based on several factors: 
a. 
Source of infection (haematogenous, contiguous, traumatic, post-surgical) 
b. 
Open or closed injury 
c. 
Immunocompetence of the host 
d. Recent contact with health care, the presence of lines, devices, prosthetic valves, 
implants

<<<PAGE 74>>>
69 
 
e. 
The time interval between surgery and infection in PJI/ implant associated 
infection 
 
Table 7.2: Likely organisms after orthopaedic implant surgery/ PJI based on the 
interval between surgery and infection 
Time of Onset- post 
implant
Likely Organisms 
Clinical features 
Very early infection 
(<2 days )
Group A Streptococcus 
Clostridium perfringens 
High fever, shock, bullae, 
necrosis, gangrene 
Early Infection 
(<2 wks)
S.aureus 
Gram-negative bacilli 
Fever, inflammation, poor wound 
healing 
Delayed Infection 
(3-10 wks) 
CONS 
NTM, 
Propionibacterium acnes 
Persistent pain, low grade fever, 
mechanical instability, sinus tract 
Late Infection 
(>10 Weeks) 
 
1. Acute 
2. Chronic 
S. aureus 
GNB 
CONS 
NTM 
Polymicrobial 
Fungal 
-Hematogenous seeding 
- sepsis, local inflammation 
-Inadequately treated early 
infection 
-signs of infection after bridging 
symptoms: pain, wound healing 
disturbances, nonunion 
 
 
 
Fig 7.3. Empiric choices for B&J infections

<<<PAGE 75>>>
70 
 
 
Fig 7.4 Approach to Prosthetic Joint & Implant-associated Infections 
 
 
Table 7.3: Pathogen-specific Antibiotics for B&J Infections 
 
Organism 
Drugs 
of 
Choice 
Alternative Drugs 
Remarks 
MSSA 
-Cloxacillin 
-Flucloxacillin 
-Cefazolin 
 
-Ceftriaxone 
-Daptomycin 
 
Rifampicin 300-450mg PO/day 
may be added in presence of 
hardware 
Possible antagonism with Beta-
lactams. Best results if along with 
FQN (FQN use is unlikely in 
India 
due 
to 
widespread 
resistance) 
MRSA 
-Vancomycin 
 -Teicoplanin 
 
 
-Daptomycin 
- Linezolid 
-Rifampicin 300-450mg PO/day 
(as above) 
-High dose of vancomycin used 
15-20mg/kg 
q8-12h 
(max. 
2g/dose) Monitor trough levels, 
renal function 
Β-hemolytic 
Streptococcus 
-Penicillin G 
- Ampicillin 
-Ceftriaxone 
Vancomycin 
(if 
immediate 
hypersensitivity 
to Pen) 
Monitor 
vancomycin 
trough 
levels

<<<PAGE 76>>>
71 
 
Enterococcus spp. 
Penicillin-
susceptible 
 
Penicillin resistant 
 
-Penicillin G 
- Ampicillin 
 
Vancomycin 
-Teicoplanin 
 
 
-Vancomycin 
-Teicoplanin 
 
-Daptomycin 
- Linezolid 
 
-Combination 
therapy 
with 
aminoglycoside 
not 
proven 
superior in PJI 
-May use BLBLI (piperacillin-
tazobactam) for BLase producers 
- VRE to be treated as per 
individual 
susceptibility 
(daptomycin, 
linezolid) 
are 
options 
Pseudomonas spp. 
Ceftazidime 
Cefepime 
 
-Piperacillin 
tazobactam 
-Meropenem 
(for 
ESBL 
producers) 
 
-Polymyxin 
/ 
Colistin 
Ciprofloxacin 750mg PO BD 
may be used upfront if susceptible 
(good 
penetration 
& 
bioavailability) 
-Renal 
dose 
adjustment 
for 
colistin only (Polymyxins have 
poor 
B&J 
penetration, 
use 
antibiotic laden spacer/ beads) 
Enterobacteriaceae 
Beta-lactam 
based on in vitro 
susceptibility 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
Meropenem (for 
ESBL producers) 
-Polymyxin 
/ 
Colistin 
 
Ciprofloxacin 750mg PO BD 
may be used upfront if susceptible 
(good 
penetration 
& 
bioavailability) 
 
-Renal 
dose 
adjustment 
for 
colistin only 
(Polymyxins 
have 
poor B&J 
penetration, use antibiotic laden 
spacer/ beads) 
Propionibacterium 
acnes 
Ceftriaxone 
-Vancomycin 
-Clindamycin 
Monitor 
vancomycin 
trough 
levels 
Higher risk of CDAD with 
clindamycin prolonged use 
Gram- 
neg. 
Anaerobes 
Metronidazole 
 
Metronidazole need not be added 
for additional anaerobic cover in 
presence of BLBLI/ carbapenems 
 
*Parenteral antibiotics are generally recommended for at least the 1st 2 weeks, may step 
down to oral antibiotics with good bioavailability if susceptible to complete the course of 
treatment 
** Antibiotic-impregnated cement spacers/beads must be considered in addition to systemic 
antibiotics especially in resistant infections with few drug options/ drugs which have poor 
B&J penetration/ drug toxicity.

<<<PAGE 77>>>
72 
 
Table 7.4: Directed Oral Antibiotic Options for Treatment of B&J Infections 
 
Organism 
Antibiotic 
Dosage 
Chronic 
Suppression 
MSSA 
Cloxacillin/ 
Flucloxacillin 
Cephalexin 
1000 mg TDS/QDS 
1000 mg QDS 
500 mg TDS 
 
500 mg TDS 
MRSA 
Linezolid 
 
 
TMP-SMX 
Doxycycline 
600 mg bd 
 
 
800/160 mg BD 
100 mg BD 
Linezolid 
Difficult for a 
prolonged period 
800/160 mg BD 
100 mg BD 
B- 
haemolytic 
Streptococcus 
Cephalexin 
Amoxicillin 
1000 mg QDS 
500 mg QDS 
500 mg TDS 
500 mg TDS 
Enterococcus spp. 
Amoxicillin 
500 mg QDS 
500 mg TDS 
Pseudomonas spp. 
Ciprofloxacin 
750 mg BD 
500 mg BD 
Enterobacteriaceae Ciprofloxacin 
TMP SMX 
Doxycycline 
750 mg BD 
800/160 mg BD 
100 mg BD 
500 mg BD 
800/160 mg BD 
100 mg BD 
After initial IV antibiotics for 2-3 weeks, high dose oral antibiotics may be used for 
susceptible isolates for the remaining duration of therapy. 
 
 
Table 7.5: Etiology of osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, prosthetic and implant-
associated infections 
 Study Centre 
GP 
Organisms 
GN 
Organisms 
Enterobact- 
eriacaceae 
Non 
fermenters 
Resistance 
ICMR 
(includes 
SSTI, 
B&J data) 
53.9% 
53% 
22.2% 
30.9% 
- 
Tummala et al 
AP 2017 
74% 
40% 
14% of GNB 
21% 
of 
GNB 
MRSA 
31.57% 
Mishra et al 
Bhopal 2016 
21% 
77% 
59% 
18% 
MDR- 35% 
ESBL- 65% 
CRE- 58% 
Chhabra et al 
Himachal 
Pradesh 2015 
26% 
74% 
61% 
 
 
Rajkumari et al 
Delhi 2014 
22% 
78% 
50% 
50% 
CRE-72% 
Fernandes et al 
Mangalore 2013 
60.9% 
37.5% 
 
 
ESBL- 
31.7%

<<<PAGE 78>>>
73 
 
Table 7.6: Likely etiology of B&J Infections based on Host and Environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7.7: Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
Drugs of Choice 
Doses 
Cloxacillin 
2 g q4-6h 
Flucloxacillin 
2 g q4-6h 
Cefazolin 
2 g q8h 
Ceftriaxone 
2-4g q24h 
Vancomycin 
1 5mg/kg q12h 
Teicoplanin 
12 mg/kg q12h x 3 doses; foll. by 
12 mg/kg/d 
Daptomycin 
8-10 mg/kg/d (MRSA) 
Linezolid 
600 mg q12h 
Penicillin G 
20-24mu/day (divided 
into 6 
doses) 
Ampicillin 
2 g q4-6h 
Ceftazidime 
2 g q8h 
Cefepime 
2 g q 12h 
Piperacillin tazobactam 
4.5 g q6-8h 
Meropenem 
1g q8h 
Polymyxin 
15L IV loading dose, 5L IV q8h 
Colistin 
9 mU loading dose, 3mU IVq8h 
Clindamycin 
600-900 mg q8h 
Metronidazole 
500 mg q8h 
 
 
Open 
Injuries- 
Soil 
contamination
Recent 
health-care 
contact/ lines/ devices etc. 
Special 
hosts 
(neutropenic, 
immunosuppressants, 
HIV, 
post-
transplant, CKD) 
Gram-negative 
Enterobacteriaceae
S. aureus (MSSA/ MRSA) 
Nocardia spp. 
Pseudomonas spp. 
CONS 
Salmonella spp.(sickle cell, thalassemias) 
Acinetobacter spp. 
Enterococcus spp. 
Burkholderia pseudomallei 
(diabetics, alcoholics) 
Clostridium spp. 
(anaerobes) 
Drug resistant GNB 
Candida spp. 
Cryptococcus spp. 
Nocardia spp. 
Burkholderiacepacia 
Endemic mycoses (Histoplasma spp.) 
NTM 
NTM 
Opportunistic moulds (Aspergillus spp., 
Mucor) 
Environmental 
moulds 
Candida spp. 
(Above organisms must be kept in mind in 
addition to other routine causes of B&J 
infections)

<<<PAGE 79>>>
74 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. Dr Muralidhar Varma 
Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, 
KMC, Manipal 
 
2. Dr. Ayesha Jamshed Sunavala, 
Consultant - Infectious Diseases 
P.D. Hinduja Hospital & Medical Research Centre, Mumbai 
 
3. Dr Krutarth Kanjiya, 
FNB Fellow [Infectious Diseases] 
Consultant 
P.D. Hinduja Hospital & Medical Research Centre, Mumbai 
 
4. Dr Rajeev Soman 
Consultant Infectious Diseases 
Jupiter Hospital, Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital, 
Bharati Vidyapeeth Medical College Hospital, Pune 
P.D. Hinduja Hospital & Medical Research Centre, Mumbai

<<<PAGE 80>>>
75 
 
CHAPTER: 8 
Management of CNS Infections 
 
 
8.1 Acute Febrile Encephalopathy (AFE)/ Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) 
 A case of AFE/ AES is defined as the acute onset of fever and a change in mental 
status (including symptoms such as confusion, disorientation, coma, or inability to 
talk) AND/OR new onset of seizures (excluding simple febrile seizures). 
 The causes of AFE/AES are listed below 
- Acute bacterial meningitis 
- Acute viral encephalitis 
- Tubercular meningitis 
- Sepsis associated encephalopathy (due to systemic infections including UTI, 
pneumonia, enteric fever etc) 
- Cerebral malaria 
- Other pathogens: Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, Leptospira 
 Non infectious causes: Reye’s syndrome, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, 
metabolic/toxic encephalopathy, non convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) and 
autoimmune encephalitis. 
 Acute febrile encephalopathy is a medical emergency. The algorithm below details 
the approach towards diagnosis and management of a case of AFE/ AES in children 
but applies similarly to adults as well. 
 Initial management includes resuscitation and stabilization based on the clinical 
condition followed by clinical evaluation, imaging and investigations to establish the 
diagnosis. Empiric therapy (may include ceftriaxone, acyclovir, doxycycline and 
artesunate) should be started immediately after drawing blood cultures pending 
results of tests. Supportive care should be continued and then therapy narrowed based 
on the results of investigations. 
 
8.1.1 Evaluation and management of AFE/AES case 
Step I: Rapid assessment and stabilization 
 Establish and maintain airway: Intubate if GCS<8, impaired airway reflexes, 
abnormal respiratory pattern, signs of raised ICP, oxygen saturation <92% despite 
high flow oxygen and fluid refractory shock. 
 Ventilation, Oxygenation

<<<PAGE 81>>>
76 
 
 Circulation: Establish IV access, take samples (CBC, Blood sugar, KFT, LFT, 
electrolytes, blood gas, lactate), fluid bolus if in circulatory failure (20 ml/kg NS), 
inotropes if required 
 Identify signs of cerebral herniation or raised ICP 
 Temperature: treat fever and hypothermia 
 Treat ongoing seizures- benzodiazepine, followed by phenytoin loading 
 
Step II: Clinical evaluation: History and examination establish etiology (Table 8.1) 
 
Table 8.1: Causes of AFE with pointers to diagnosis and recommended tests 
Cause 
Pointers to diagnosis 
Diagnostic test 
Meningococcus 
Petechial rash, adrenal hemorrhage 
Blood and CSF cultures 
Latex/PCR 
in 
CSF 
for 
meningococcus 
Herpes 
simplex 
virus 1 and 2 
PLEDS on EEG, MRI showing 
temporal lobe involvement, CSF rbc 
CSF HSV PCR for HSV-1 and 
II 
HHV6, HHV 7 
Rash 
Specific PCR in CSF 
EBV 
Rash, 
generalized 
adenopathy, 
tonsillitis, organomegaly 
EBV VCA IgM in blood 
EBV PCR in CSF 
Varicella zoster 
Antecedent rash 
Varicella IgM in blood 
CSF varicella PCR 
HIV 
Fever, adenopathy, rash 
HIV ELISA in blood 
HIV PCR in blood 
Japanese 
encephalitis 
Epidemiology, 
dystonic 
and 
extrapyramidal movements 
MRI shows changes in thalami, 
basal ganglia, substantia nigra 
IgM antibody in serum and CSF 
Measles 
Antecedent or concurrent rash 
History of vaccination 
Measles IgM in blood and CSF 
Mumps 
Antecedent/ 
concurrent 
parotitis, 
high amylase,low sugar in CSF 
Mumps IgM in blood 
Mumps virus in CSF by PCR 
Influenza 
Respiratory 
prodrome, 
ongoing 
outbreak 
Influenza PCR in throat swab 
Dengue 
Ongoing outbreak, rash, low WBC 
and platelets, biochemical hepatitis 
Dengue specific PCR in CSF 
Dengue IgM, NS1 antigen in 
blood 
Chikungunya 
Ongoing outbreak, Rash, severe joint 
pains 
Chinkungunya PCR in CSF 
Chinkungunya PCR in blood, 
IgM in blood 
Enterovirus 
Vesicular lesions in the mouth, GI 
symptoms, brain stem involvement 
Specific PCR in CSF 
Rabies 
Animal bite, hydrophobia, brain 
stem involvement 
Specific IgM antibody in CSF 
Nuchal 
skin 
biopsy/ 
conjunctival smears for direct 
fluorescent antibody 
Brain biopsy 
Chandipura 
Epidemiology 
PCR in CSF, saliva/ IgM

<<<PAGE 82>>>
77 
 
ELISA in CSF 
Nipah 
Epidemiology, contact with animals, 
fruit bats 
PCR/ IgM ELISA in CSF 
Mycoplasma 
Respiratory 
illness, 
skin 
rash, 
haemolytic anemia 
Mycoplasma IgM in blood 
Mycoplasma PCR in throat 
swab 
Rickettsia 
Epidemiology, 
rash, 
eschar, 
multisystem involvement 
IgM & IgG antibodies in serum 
Scrub typhus DNA in whole 
blood, buffy coat, eschar/skin 
rash 
Leptospirosis 
Icterus, myalgia, renal failure 
Leptospira PCR in blood 
Specific IgM in blood 
Enteric fever 
Protracted 
illness, 
hepatosplenomegaly 
Blood cultures 
Cerebral malaria 
Pallor, splenomegaly 
Smear or rapid antigen test for 
malaria 
Sepsis 
associated 
encephalopathy 
Infection at extra CNS site 
Blood, urine cultures, CXR, 
chest and abdominal CT 
 
Step III: Empirical Treatment (must be started immediately after drawing blood cultures) 
 Ceftriaxone 
 Acyclovir (use in all suspected sporadic viral encephalitis) 
 Artesunate (stop if peripheral smear and RDT are negative) 
 Doxycyline 
 
Step IV: Imaging (MRI preferred, CT if MRI not available)* 
Step V: Tests to establish a diagnosis (Table 8.2) 
 
Table 8.2: Differentiation of cause of AFE based on CSF analysis 
 
Parameter 
ABM 
Partially 
treated ABM 
Viral 
TBM 
CSF TLC 
1000-5000 
(<100-10000) 
100-1000 
10-1000 
50-1000 
CSF DLC 
80-95% PMN 
L > PMN 
L> PMN 
In acute stage PMN 
may predominate 
L > PMN In 
acute 
stage 
PMN 
may 
predominate 
CSF sugar 
<40 in 50-60% 
Low 
Normal 
(except 
mumps) 
ratio <0.5 in 
95% 
CSF 
protein 
mg% 
100-500, 
elevated in all 
100-500 
100-500 
50-1000 
CSF lactate 
Elevated 
Elevated 
Normal 
? 
 L: Lymphocytes PMN: polymorphonuclear cells

<<<PAGE 83>>>
78 
 
 Two sets of blood cultures, Urine analysis and cultures, CXR. 
 CSF examination with cell count, protein, sugar, aerobic cultures and if available, 
lactate. Ten ml should be saved for further tests. 
 PCR/serology/ viral cultures in CSF/ blood/ respiratory secretions/ stool/ rectal 
swab 
 
Step VI: Supportive care and treatment 
 Maintain euglycemia, control fever, and maintain hydration 
 Treat raised intracranial pressure, mild head-end elevation–15-30° 
 Treat seizures: Give anticonvulsant if history of seizures, if GCS <8, features of 
raised ICT 
 Steroids: Pulse steroids (methylprednisolone or dexamethasone) must be given in 
children with suspected ADEM. 
 
Step VII: Review of diagnosis based on reports of the microbiologic tests and MRI to see 
if a definitive diagnosis has been made and targeted therapy 
 
Step VIII: Prevention/treatment of complications and rehabilitation 
 Physiotherapy, posture change, prevent bed sores and exposure keratitis 
 Complications: 
aspiration 
pneumonia, 
nosocomial 
infections, 
coagulation 
disturbances 
 Nutrition: early feeding 
 Psychological support to patient and family 
 
* If the diagnosis of HSV is made a treat for 14-21 days. Stop acyclovir if alternative 
diagnosis made/ if MRI imaging does not suggest HSV/if two PCR 48 hours apart are 
negative 
*Imaging should be done before a lumbar puncture in patients with those with focal 
deficit, papilloedema, immune compromised hosts and those with features of raised ICP. 
Other contraindications for a lumbar puncture include respiratory/ cardiovascular 
compromise, platelet counts of less than 30,000 or infection at the site of the lumbar 
puncture. 
 
8.2 Acute Bacterial Meningitis (ABM) 
8.2.1 Signs and symptoms 
Acute meningitis is characterized by the classic triad of fever, neck stiffness and 
alteration of sensorium. Case definitions have varied in various studies but in one 
pediatric study clinically suspected meningitis was defined as a child presenting with 
fever (either by history based on parents’/guardian’s recall or based on clinical findings

<<<PAGE 84>>>
79 
 
of body temperature) for a duration of less than seven days along with one of the 
following signs; neck stiffness, bulging fontanelle, altered or reduced level of 
consciousness, prostration or lethargy, convulsions without documented seizure disorder. 
Clinically probable meningitis was defined as a child presenting with suspected 
meningitis and CSF examination showing turbid appearance, leukocytosis >100 
cells/mm3or leukocytosis 10–100 cells/mm3 with either decreased glucose (<40 mg/dl) or 
elevated protein (>100 mg/dl) levels. Confirmed meningitis was defined as a patient with 
a positive CSF latex/ culture/ PCR and or positive blood culture with clinical syndrome 
consistent with meningitis. 
 
8.2.2 Etiology 
The etiology and resistance pattern of ABM is age dependent (Table 8.3). Unlike the 
western world, Group B Streptococcus and Listeria are not reported as common causes of 
neonatal meningitis in India. A significant proportion of late onset neonatal meningitis 
can also be due to nosocomial pathogens including MRSA and Candida. 
H. Influenzae and meningococcus are uniformly susceptible to the 3rd generation 
cephalopsorins. There is a rising incidence of resistance in S. pneumoniae to penicillins 
and 3rd generation cephalosporins. In a study from Vellore, India 167 CSF pneumococcal 
isolates were evaluated from 2008-2016. The penicillin non susceptibility increased from 
9.5% in 2008 to 42.8% in 2016 and cephalosporin resistance increased from 4.7% in 
2008 to 28.5% in 2016. Overall resistant rates were 43.7% for penicillin and 14.9% for 
cephalosporins. Of the 25 isolates that were resistant to cephalosporins, 8 were fully 
resistant (MIC > 2) and 17 were intermediately resistant (MIC 1) 
 
10.2.3 Investigations and Diagnosis 
The initial evaluation for a patient with suspected bacterial meningitis should include at 
least a complete blood count, two sets of blood cultures and if available CRP and PCT. 
CSF evaluation is a must. When a lumbar puncture cannot be done immediately, blood 
cultures should be drawn and empiric antibiotics administered. 
 The CSF should be sent for cell count, sugar and protein, gram stain and culture. An 
extra sample should be preserved for later tests that may be required. Samples should 
ideally be examined within 30- 60 minutes to increase positivity in CSF culture and 
for accurate assessment of cell counts. If the delay is expected the samples should be 
kept at room temperature and never refrigerated. The sensitivity of latex agglutination 
tests is kit dependent and variable. 
 Molecular tests have enhanced sensitivity as compared to cultures and can be 
requested if available. Commercially available multiplex meningitis panels covering 
common bacterial, viral and fungal pathogens that cause community acquired 
meningitis (Pneumococcus, Meningococcus, H. Influenza, Group B Streptococcus, 
Listeria, E. coli K1, Cytomegalovirus, Enterovirus, Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2,

<<<PAGE 85>>>
80 
 
Human herpes virus 6, Human parechovirus, Varicella zoster virus and Cryptococcus 
neoformans/gattii 
 The empiric antibiotic regime for suspected/ probable bacterial meningitis is discussed 
in Table 8.3. 
 
 Table 8.3: Etiology and empiric therapy of community acquired acute bacterial 
meningitis 
 
Age 
Likely pathogens 
First line 
Alternative 
Age < 1 month 
Gram 
negative 
( 
Klebsiella, 
E 
coli, 
Pseudomonas, 
Acinetobacter) 
Staphylococcus, 
Enterococcus, 
Pneumococcus, Candida 
Meropenem (Add 
vancomycin 
if 
risk of MRSA) 
Cefotaxime 
and 
gentamicin 
1month 
– 
50 
years 
S. 
pneumoniae, 
Haemophilus influenzae, 
Meningococcus 
Ceftriaxone 
and 
vancomycin 
Cefotaxime 
 
and 
vancomycin 
>50 
years, 
alcoholism 
or 
other diseases of 
impaired CMI 
S. 
pneumoniae, 
Meningococcus, Listeria, 
gram negative bacilli 
Ampicillin 
and 
ceftriaxone 
and 
vancomycin 
Meropenem 
and 
vancomycin 
 
 The administration of dexamethasone 15- 20 minutes prior to giving the first dose of 
antibiotic has been found to be beneficial for pneumococcal meningitis in adults and 
Hemophilus influenza meningitis in children. The benefit of dexamethasone in 
childhood pneumococcal meningitis is debatable. The dose is 0.15 mg/kg every 6 
hours for 48 hours -96 hours (10 mg 6 hourly in adults). A practical issue is that the 
turnaround time for confirmation of etiology of meningitis is at least 48 hours unless 
molecular tests are used. Also in most suspected meningitis, the first dose of antibiotic 
is given soon after drawing blood cultures/ doing the lumbar puncture even before the 
basic CSF reports come in. Therefore it is acceptable to at least give one dose prior to 
the antibiotic in suspected meningitis. Further doses can be continued depending on 
the CSF reports. Steroids are not recommended for meningitis in neonates. 
 If an organism is identified, therapy can be modified accordingly. If the organism is 
cephalosporin susceptible, vancomycin can be stopped. Consider adding rifampicin if 
cephalosporin MIC ≥4 µg/mL, if the child’s condition worsening after 48 hours of 
vancomycin + ceftriaxone, if dexamethasone has been given or if repeat LP shows the 
presence of bacteria. 
 In patients improving clinically, there is no need to repeat CSF analysis to demonstrate 
improvement or prior to stopping therapy. Repeat CSF should be done in cases of 
clinical non response at 48 hours, patients with penicillin/cephalosporin resistant 
strains who have received adjunctive dexamethasone, and in neonates to document

<<<PAGE 86>>>
81 
 
sterilization of CSF. Causes of clinical non response in a case of bacterial meningitis 
include complications such as subdural empyema, cerebral abscess, ventriculitis etc or 
drug resistance. 
 The duration of therapy for uncomplicated meningitis is generally 10-14 days. If a 
specific pathogen is identified then duration is pathogen dependent: 7 days for 
meningococcus and H. influenzae, 10-14 days for pneumococcus, 2-3 weeks for group 
B Streptococcus, 3-6 weeks for Listeria, and 3 weeks for gram negative meningitis. 
 
8.3 Health care associated meningitis/ ventriculitis: 
 Health care associated meningitis/ ventriculitis is seen in patients undergoing 
neurosurgeries, head trauma, external ventricular drainage, lumbar punctures etc. 
 The etiology depends on local epidemiology but commonly includes multi drug / 
extremely drug resistant gram negative pathogens including Acinetobacter, 
Pseudomonas, Klebsiella and Staphylococcus aureus/ epidermidis. 
 Diagnosis is a challenge since sensorial obtundation (a cardinal symptom of 
meningitis) may be due to the underlying disease/ surgery. The CSF may be abnormal 
due to pre existing bleed/ surgery induced chemical meningitis. The patients are 
frequently on antibiotics and hence microbial isolation rates are low. 
 CSF should be sampled and sent for cell count, protein, sugar and aerobic cultures. 
Elevated CSF lactate (> 4 mmol/l) and procalcitonin help in differentiating between 
infective and chemical meningitis. The results of cultures especially those obtained 
through EVD should be carefully interpreted since they may grow colonizers/ 
contaminants. Contrast MRI is recommended to pick up meningitis, ventricular 
enhancement, abscesses, cerebritis, and empyemas. 
 Empirical therapy depends on local flora but usually includes high dose meropenem 
with vancomycin. Therapy should be modified based on culture reports. Surgical 
drainage of pus and removal of hardware may be needed. For carbapenem resistant 
pathogens, intraventricular / intrathecal therapy with colistin/ polymyxin B/ 
aminoglycosides is indicated. The drugs are best administered through an Omaya 
reservoir but may sometimes have to be given through EVD/ lumbar punctures. Doses 
of drugs that can be administered in the CSF are listed in Table (Annexure 2). The 
duration of therapy varies depending on the causative organism but is generally 2-3 
weeks (Table 8.4).

<<<PAGE 87>>>
82 
 
Table 8.4: Treatment of health care associated meningitis and ventriculitis 
 
Organism 
Preferred drug 
Alternative drug 
 
Methicillin 
sensitive 
Staphylococcus 
Cloxacillin 
Ceftriaxone 
Methicillin 
resistant 
Staphylococcus 
Vancomycin 
Linezolid/Cotrimoxazole if susceptible 
Non ESBL gram negative Ceftriaxone 
Cefotaxime/ Ceftazidime 
ESBL gram negative 
Meropenem 
Cotrimoxazole/ Moxifloxacin 
Carbapenem 
resistant 
gram negative 
Systemic Colistin/ Polymyxin B with (depending upon 
susceptibility) high dose tigecycline/minocycline/ fosfomycin/ co-
trimoxazole/ quinolones/chloramphenicol 
With 
intraventricular/ 
intrathecal 
colistin/ 
polymyxin 
/ 
aminoglycosides 
 
8.4 CSF shunt infections 
 The usual symptoms include fever with headache/ nausea/ lethargy, tenderness or 
erythema over the subcutaneous tunnel and symptoms of peritonitis/pleuritis in 
patients with ventriculoperitoneal/ ventriculopleural shunts. 
 The initial investigation should be a tap of the shunt chamber and sending the CSF for 
cell count, protein, sugar and aerobic cultures. The lab should be asked to incubate the 
samples for 10 days to detect organisms such as Propionibacterium acnes. 
 For confirmed shunt infections the shunt should be removed and a temporary external 
ventricular drain inserted. The shunt should be sent for cultures. 
 Antimicrobial therapy depends on the causative organism. For culture negative shunt 
infections/ pending culture reports, a combination of ceftriaxone and vancomycin may 
be used. If the organism is highly drug resistant/ not responding to treatment, 
antibiotics should be administered through the external ventricular drain. 
 The time of shunt re implantation depends on the causative organism and extent of 
infection. It can be done as soon as after 2 days of negative cultures in patients with 
CONS and normal CSF sugar, or 7 days of negative cultures in patients with CONS 
and abnormal CSF findings, 10 days of negative cultures in patients with infection 
with S. aureus/ gram negative bacilli. The total duration of antimicrobial therapy 
varies from 7-10 days for CONS to 10-14 days for S. aureus and gram negative bacilli. 
 
8.5 Brain abscess: 
 The etiology of brain abscess is based on the underlying predisposing factor and is 
listed in Table 8.5 along with the choice of empiric therapy. 
 An attempt should be made to establish the etiology by blood cultures and aspiration 
of pus. This is especially required if the host is immunocompromised. Imaging of the 
chest and abdomen should be done to see if an extra-CNS site can be sampled.

<<<PAGE 88>>>
83 
 
 Drainage by aspiration is important for large abscesses/ drug resistant organisms. 
Primary excision can also be attempted. Treatment should be modified as per cultures 
and should be given for at least 4-6 weeks and till radiologic stabilization. Medical 
treatment is significantly shortened if abscess drainage is performed and can be even 3 
weeks where excision of the abscess is done. 
 
Table 8.5: Etiology and empiric therapy for brain abscess 
 
Predisposing factor 
Likely etiology 
Empiric therapy 
Hematogenous spread from 
cyanotic 
congenital 
heart 
disease/ 
lung 
infections/ 
endocarditis 
Aerobic/ 
microaerophilic 
Streptococci, S. aureus 
Cefriaxone 
and 
metronidazole 
with/ 
without vancomycin 
Contiguous spread from otitis 
media/mastoiditis/sinusitis/ 
dental infection 
Aerobic, 
microaerophilic, 
anaerobic 
streptococci, 
Anaerobic gram negative 
bacilli, 
S. 
aureus, 
Pseudomonas 
Ceftriaxone 
and 
metronidazole 
HIV 
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, 
Nocardia, 
Toxoplasma, Cryptococcus, 
Listeria 
No empiric therapy 
Immunocompromised 
Nocardia, Mycobacterium, 
Toxoplasma, 
Mucorales, 
Aspergillus, 
Listeria, 
Cryptococcus, Candida 
Neonates 
Citrobacter/ 
Enterobacteriaceae, 
Candida 
Meropenem 
 
 
Table 8.6: Doses of drugs used in CNS infections 
 
Drug 
Adult dose 
Paediatric dose 
Artesunate 
2.4 mg/kg 0,12 and 24 hours 
and then q 24 hourly 
< 20 kg 3 mg/kg at 0,12 and 24 
hours and then q 24 hourly 
Acyclovir 
10 mg/kg 8 hourly 
10 mg/kg 8 hourly and in 
children below 12 20 mg/kg 8 
hourly 
Ceftriaxone 
2 gm 12 hourly 
50 mg/kg 12 hourly 
Ceftazidime 
2 gm q 6-8 hourly 
50 mg/kg 8 hourly 
Cefepime 
2 gm 8-12 hourly 
50 mg/ kg 12 hourly 
 Cefotaxime 
2 gm 6 hourly 
50 mg/kg 6 hourly 
Meropenem 
2 gm 8 hourly 
40 mg/kg 8 hourly 
Colistin 
9 million unit loading and then 
4.5 million units 12 hourly 
150,000 units/ kg loading and 
then 75000 units/kg 12 hourly 
Polymyxin B 
20000- 25000 units/kg loading 
and then 12500 to 15000 
units/kg 12 hourly, single dose 
15-25,000 units/ kg loading and 
then 5000-7500 units/ kg 8 
hourly

<<<PAGE 89>>>
84 
 
not to exceed 20,00,000 units 
Fosfomycin 
4 gm 6 hourly 
75-100 mg/kg/dose 6 hourly 
Cotrimoxazole 
3-6 mg/kg of TMP thrice daily 
Vancomycin 
15 mg/kg (max 2 gm)eight 
hourly 
15 mg/kg 6 hourly 
Cloxacillin 
2 gm 4 hourly 
50 mg/kg 6 hourly 
Doxycycline 
100 mg 12 hourly 
1.5-2 mg/kg 12 hourly 
Chloramphenicol 
1-2 gm 6 hourly 
25 mg/kg 6 hourly 
Rifampicin 
600 mg once daily 
10-20 mg/kg once daily 
Metronidazole 
400 mg 8 hourly 
10 mg/kg 8 hourly 
Amphotericin 
B 
deoxycholate 
1 mg/kg/day 
Liposomal 
amphotericin B 
3-5 mg/kg/day 
 
Fluconazole 
800 mg loading and then 400 
mg once daily 
12 mg/kg loading and then 6 
mg/ kg daily 
25 mg/kg loading in neonates 
and then 12 mg/kg daily 
 
Table 8.7: Doses of drugs to be given by the intrathecal/ intraventricular route (CSF shunt 
infections) 
Drug 
Dose 
Vancomycin 
5-20 mg 
Teicoplanin 
5-40 mg 
Amikacin 
5-50 mg 
Gentamicin 
1-8 mg 
Colistin 
10-20 mg 
Polymyxin B 
50,000 units 
Daptomycin 
2-5 mg 
Tobramycin 
5-20 mg 
 
 
References 
1. Tiwari JK, Malhotra B, Chauhan A, Malhotra H, Sharma P, Deeba F, Trivedi K, Swamy AM. 
Aetiological study of viruses causing acute encephalitis syndrome in North West India. Indian 
J Med Microbiol. 2017; 35:529-534. 
2. Modi A, Atam V, Jain N, Gutch M, Verma R. The etiological diagnosis and outcome in 
patients of acute febrile encephalopathy: a prospective observational study at tertiary care 
center. Neurol India. 2012;60:168-73. 
3. Jain P, Prakash S, Tripathi PK, Chauhan A, Gupta S, Sharma U et al. Emergence of Orientia 
tsutsugamushi as an important cause of Acute Encephalitis Syndrome in India. PLoSNegl 
Trop Dis. 2018;12: e0006346. 
4. Sharma S, Mishra D, Aneja S, Kumar R, Jain A, Vashishtha VM; Expert Group on 
Encephalitis, Indian Academy of Pediatrics. Consensus guidelines on evaluation and 
management of suspected acute viral encephalitis in children in India. Indian Pediatr. 
2012;49(11):897-910.

<<<PAGE 90>>>
85 
 
5. Jayaraman Y, Veeraraghavan B, ChethrapillyPurushothaman GK, Sukumar B, Kangusamy B, 
Nair Kapoor A et al. Hospital Based Sentinel Surveillance of Bacterial Meningitis (HBSSBM) 
Network Team. Burden of bacterial meningitis in India: Preliminary data from a hospital 
based sentinel surveillance network. PLoS One. 2018; 13(5):e0197198. 
6. Oordt-Speets AM, Bolijn R, van Hoorn RC, Bhavsar A, Kyaw MH. Global etiology of 
bacterial meningitis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2018 Jun 11; 
13(6):e0198772. 
7. Devi U, Bora R, Malik V, Deori R, Gogoi B, Das JK, Mahanta J. Bacterial aetiology of 
neonatal meningitis: A study from north-east India. Indian J Med Res. 2017;145:138-143. 
8. Van de Beek D, de Gans J, Tunkel AR, Wijdicks EF. Community-acquired bacterial 
meningitis in adults. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(1):44-53. 
9. Verghese VP, Veeraraghavan B, Jayaraman R, Varghese R, Neeravi A, Jayaraman Y et al. 
Increasing incidence of penicillin- and cefotaxime-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae 
causing meningitis in India: Time for revision of treatment guidelines? Indian J Med 
Microbiol. 2017;35:228-236. 
10. Tunkel AR, Hartman BJ, Kaplan SL, Kaufman BA, Roos KL, Scheld WM, Whitley 
RJ.Practice guidelines for the management of bacterial meningitis. Clin Infect Dis. 
2004;39(9):1267-84. 
11. Tunkel AR, Hasbun R, Bhimraj A, Byers K, Kaplan SL, Michael Scheld W, et al. Infectious 
Diseases Society of America's Clinical Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated 
Ventriculitis and Meningitis. Clin Infect Dis. 2017 Feb 14. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciw861. 
 
Names of the contributors: 
 
1. 
Dr Tanu Singhal 
Consultant Pediatrics and Infectious Disease 
Kokilaben Dhirubhai Ambani Hospital and Medical Research Institute 
Mumbai 
 
2. 
Dr Balaji Veeraraghavan 
The Hilda Lazarus Core Research Chair 
Christian Medical College & Hospital, Velllore

<<<PAGE 91>>>
86 
 
CHAPTER: 9 
Management of Urinary Tract Infections (UTI) 
 
9.1 UTI syndromes 
 Asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB): The presence of microbiologically significant 
bacteria in a non-contaminated urine specimen in a patient without signs and 
symptoms of urinary tract infection. 
 Acute Cystitis: Syndrome involving dysuria, frequency and urgency with or without 
fever with chills. Similar symptoms can also be seen in urethritis. This is termed 
simple UTI. 
 Acute Pyelonephritis: A clinical syndrome characterized by flank pain, tenderness 
or both and fever associated with dysuria, urgency and frequency. Acute 
pyelonephritis indicates acute infection in the kidney. In children, this is considered 
as complicated UTI. In infants, it may present as septicemia without overt clinical 
source. 
 Complicated UTI: UTI occurring in a patient with co-morbid medical/ surgical 
conditions e.g.diabetes mellitus and/or anatomic abnormalities of the urinary tract 
e.g. stricture urethra. In young children, suspected pyelonephritis is termed 
complicated UTI, as a significant percentage will have an underlying congenital 
abnormality of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). 
 
9.1.2 Other commonly used terminologies 
 
Relapse: Recurrence of bacteriuria with the same infecting microorganism that was 
present before therapy was started. 
 
Re-infection: Recurrence of bacteriuria with microorganism different from the 
original infecting organism. 
9.1.3 When to suspect (risk factors) 
 Female sex 
 Vaginal infection 
 Prior UTI 
 Sexual activity 
 Diabetes mellitus 
 Urinary catheter 
 Neurogenic bladder 
 Renal calculi 
 Renal stent 
 Urethral stricture 
 Benign prostatic hypertrophy(BPH) 
 Prostate cancer 
 Vesicoureteric reflux 
 Bladder dysfunction

<<<PAGE 92>>>
87 
 
9.1.4 Common organisms causing UTI (As per ICMR - AMRSN data 2017) 
- 
Enterobacteriaceae 
 
 
- 73.2 % 
o E. coli 
 
 
 
- 49.24% 
o Klebsiella spp 
 
 
-17.44% 
o Proteus spp 
 
 
 
- 1.4% 
o Citrobacter 
 
 
 
- 1.3% 
 
- 
Enterococcus species 
 
 
- 10.9% 
- 
Non-fermenting gram-negative bacilli 
- 8.2% 
- 
Staphylococcus aureus 
 
 
- 0.9% 
 
9.1.5 Management of Urinary tract infection 
 
9.1.5.1 Investigation and diagnosis 
a. Urine microscopy - the presence of 10 leukocytes/mm3 of uncentrifuged urine or 
10 leukocytes/hpf of the centrifuged sample, in a clinically suspected UTI, is 
important for diagnosis. 
b. Dipstick leukocyte esterase test – This is a rapid screening test for UTI; a negative 
test result does not rule out UTI. 
c. Urine culture – 
 This is most useful when collected from a patient with clinical features of UTI, 
and should always be collected before the first dose of antibiotic. 
 Usually, bacteriuria of 105cfu/ml is associated with UTI. However, any colony 
count is significant in symptomatic young women and men with pyuria. Any 
colony count of bacteria grown from a suprapubic aspirate is significant. 
 The sample is to be collected in a sterile screw-capped container and up to a 
minimum volume of 10-20 ml. 
o 
Midstream clean catch 
o 
Supra-pubic aspiration especially in infants 
o 
Aseptic single catheterization for sample collection 
o 
Collection procedure in a catheterized patient: If the catheter is in place <14 
days, urine must be collected using a syringe and needle (No. 26) from the 
Foley’s catheter after disinfecting the rubber surface with 70% ethyl alcohol. 
If the catheter is >14 days, replace the old catheter before collection of urine 
for culture. 
 Urine samples should not be obtained from catheter bags. 
 Storage & Transport: Transport of the specimen and plating should be done 
within 1 hour. If delay, the urine sample must be refrigerated at 4ºC for a 
maximum of 6-8 hours.

<<<PAGE 93>>>
88 
 
d. Blood cultures (two sets) – Should be sent before the first dose of antibiotics if the 
patient is febrile, has suspected acute pyelonephritis or complicated UTI. 
e. Radiology – Radiology should only facilitate diagnosis of UTI 
 Ultrasound of kidney, urinary tract and bladder is essential for all complicated and 
recurrent (more than 2 episodes) UTI. 
 CECT of kidney and the urinary system is indicated when pyelonephritis, 
perinephric abscess or intra-renal abscess are suspected. 
 
Table 9.1: Clinical features and investigations for different UTI syndromes 
Condition 
Clinical 
symptoms 
Routine urine 
analysis 
Culture 
Radiology 
Asymptomatic 
bacteriuria 
(ASB) 
Nil 
May or may not 
have significant 
pyuria and/or 
dipstick leukocyte 
esterase test 
positive 
Positive 
Normal 
Acute Cystitis 
Fever with 
chills 
Frequency, 
urgency, 
dysuria 
Suprapubic 
tenderness 
Significant pyuria 
and/or Dipstick 
leukocyte esterase 
test positive 
 
Positive 
Bladder wall thickening 
Acute 
Pyelonephritis 
In addition to 
cystitis- 
 Vomiting, 
flank 
pain, 
renal 
angle 
tenderness 
 Hypotension 
 Features 
of 
septicemia in 
young infants 
Significant pyuria 
and/or Dipstick 
leukocyte esterase 
test positive 
Positive 
- Ultrasound 
–renal 
swelling 
- CECT if performed -
Renomegaly, decreased 
opacification of affected 
area, perinephric fat 
stranding 
underlying 
Congenital anomalies of 
the kidney and urinary 
tract (CAKUT) 
- DMSA 
if 
performed 
- 
Photopenic area 
Acute 
epididymo-
orchitis 
Acute onset 
unilateral 
scrotal pain 
with / without 
swelling; 
Torsion to be 
ruled out 
Significant pyuria 
and/or dipstick 
leukocyte esterase 
test positive 
-Urethral 
swab for N. 
gonorrhoea
e culture 
-MSU for 
microscopy 
and culture 
First pass 
urine 
/urethral 
swab for 
- 
Colour Doppler 
ultrasound for 
Testicular vascularity 
assessment to 
differentiate between 
epididymo-orchitis and 
testicular torsion.

<<<PAGE 94>>>
89 
 
nucleic acid 
amplificati
on test 
(NAAT) 
for N. 
gonorrhoea
e, C. 
trachomatis 
and M. 
genitalium, 
if available 
 
9.1.6 Treatment: 
Table 9.2: Empiric treatment regimens for urinary tract infections, (when culture 
results are awaited) 
Urinary 
syndrome 
Drug of choice 
Alternative choice 
Comments 
Acute cystitis 
 Nitrofurantoin 
 
 Fosfomycin 
 
 
 Co-trimoxazole 
 Ertapenem 
 Amikacin (can be 
used in children as 
well) 
 
 
 
 Dosage adjustment as per eGFR. 
 Fosfomycin and nitrofurantoin 
should be avoided when there is 
suspicion of pyelonephritis or 
prostatitis / presence of systemic 
features of infection. 
 Fosfomycin 
susceptibility 
to 
being requested for, and used 
only for Gram-negative MDR 
organisms. 
Acute Pyelo-
nephritis 
 Piperacillin –
tazobactam 
 Ertapenem 
 Imipenem 
 Meropenem 
 Amikacin 
(recommended for 
children as well) 
 
 Dosage adjustment as per eGFR. 
 Treatment is for a minimum of 7 
days. 
 The total duration of treatment is 
14 days in children. 
 Same treatment regimen to be 
used for complicated UTI except 
the duration is extended (7-14 
days). 
Acute Prostatitis 
 Ertapenem 1 g 
IV once daily 
 Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
 Imipenem 
 Meropenem 
 Trimethoprim-
Sulfamethoxazole 
Urine 
and 
prostatic 
massage 
specimen 
for 
cultures 
to 
be 
collected before antibiotics. 
Prostatitis requires a minimum of 
21 days antibiotics. 
 
Epididymo-
orchitis (High 
risk of sexually 
transmitted) 
Ceftriaxone + 
Doxycycline 
 Ofloxacin 
 Levofloxacin 
Total duration of treatment is 14 
days (except for Levofloxacin 
where it is 10 days) 
Epididymo-
orchitis (Low 
 Ofloxacin 
 Levofloxacin

<<<PAGE 95>>>
90 
 
risk of sexually 
transmitted; 
likely due to 
enteric or 
urinary 
organisms) 
 
*ICMR, AMRSN data 2017 
 
Note: - 
1. Local antimicrobial resistance patterns should be the basis for empiric treatment. 
2. For acute pyelonephritis, three strategies may be employed: hospital admission, 
completely outpatient parenteral antibiotic therapy (OPAT) or single dose of 
parenteral antibiotic and supportive care in emergency room before home discharge 
with subsequent OPAT. 
3. Antibiotics should be changed based on susceptibility results as soon as they are 
available. 
4. Intravenous antibiotics must be reviewed at 48 hours, and stepping down to oral 
antibiotics should be considered. 
5. Post-treatment urine cultures in asymptomatic patients are not indicated routinely. 
6. UTIs in males are usually complicated and uncommon in the absence of obstructive 
pathology. 
7. No antibiotic treatment is required when there is the presence of pus cells in urine, 
along with negative culture results or in those with asymptomatic bacteriuria. If the 
pyuria persists, causes for sterile pyuria should be investigated. 
 
9.2 UTI in children 
 Cystitis can be treated with nitrofurantoin or amoxycillin for duration of 5-7 days. 
 Acute pyelonephritis and complicated UTI is best treated with amikacin as a single 
dose for the first few days till the child is accepting oral feeds. Thereafter the antibiotic 
may be changed to an oral preparation based on susceptibility pattern. Duration of 
treatment is 14 days. There is no role for a short-term treatment in children. 
 Children with a Vesicoureteric reflux may be treated with antibiotic prophylaxis as a 
single nighttime dose. Co-trimoxazole or Nitrofurantoin is preferred in children 
beyond three months of age.

<<<PAGE 96>>>
91 
 
Table 9.3: Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
Antibiotics 
Doses, duration and route of administration 
Acute cystitis 
1. Nitrofurantoin 
100mg BD for 5 days 
1. Nitrofurantoin 
1.25-1.75 mg/kg oral 6 hourly (Dose in children) 
2. Fosfomycin 
3.0 gm single dose 
3. Co-trimoxazole 
ds 1 tab bd for 3 days 
4. Ertapenem 
1 g IV once daily for 7 days 
 
5. Amikacin 
15mg/ kg/day once daily IVor IM for 3 days 
Acute Pyelo-nephritis 
6. Piperacillin –
tazobactam 
4.5 g IV 6 hrs 
7. Ertapenem 
1 g IV once dailyfor 7 -10 days 
8. Imipenem 
1 gm 8 hourly IV 
9. Meropenem 
1 g IV q8h 
10. Amikacin 
15mg/kg/day once daily IV/IM for 7-14 days 
Acute Prostatitis 
11. Ertapenem 
1 g IV once dailyfor 7 -10 days 
12. Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
4.5 g IV 6 hrs 
13. Imipenem 
1 gm 8 hourly 
14. Meropenem 
1g IV q8h 
15. Trimethoprim-
Sulfamethoxazole 
(160-800mg) BD 
Epididymo-orchitis 
16. Ceftriaxone 
500 mg IM 
17. Doxycycline 
100 mg BD 
18. Ofloxacin 
200 mg BD 
19. Levofloxacin 
500 mg OD 
 
Table 9.4: Antimicrobial Susceptibility of Enterobacteriaceae isolates from urine*. 
 
E. coli 
C 
E 
K 
M 
P 
Pr 
Amikacin 
86 
83 
61 
56 
NI#
79 
NI 
Cefazolin 
24 
- 
- 
27 
- 
NI 
- 
Cefotaxime 
26 
56 
33 
28 
NI 
62 
NI 
Ciprofloxacin 
28 
66 
47 
38 
NI 
43 
NI 
Colistin 
100 
NI 
97 
91 
NI 
- 
NI 
Cotrimoxazole
40 
59 
37 
30 
NI 
NI 
-

<<<PAGE 97>>>
92 
 
Etrapenem 
83 
88 
65 
56 
NI 
88 
NI 
Fosfomycin 
84 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Imipenem 
91 
88 
75 
78 
NI 
90 
NI 
Levoflox 
35 
77 
68 
48 
NI 
63 
NI 
Meropenem 
85 
79 
62 
57 
NI 
88 
NI 
NFT 
83 
85 
45 
48 
NI 
34 
 
Pip-Taz 
80 
84 
60 
56 
NI 
97 
NI 
*ICMR, AMRSN data 2017 # number less than 30 (number insignificant) 
*C: Citrobacter, E: Enterobacter, K: Klebsiella, M: Morganella , P: Proteus, Pr: Providencia 
References 
1. Vijayakumar M, Kanitkar M, Nammalwar BR, Bagga A (2011). Revised statement on 
management of urinary tract infections. Indian Pediatr 48(9), 709-17. 
2. Gupta K, Hooton TM, Naber KG, Wullt B, Colgan R, Miller LG, et al (2011). International 
clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis 
in women: A 2010 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the European 
Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An Official 
Publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America; 52(5), e103-20. 
3. Hooton TM, Bradley SF, Cardenas DD, Colgan R, Geerlings SE, Rice JC, et al (2010). 
Diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of catheter-associated urinary tract infection in adults: 
2009 International Clinical Practice Guidelines from the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An Official Publication of the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America50(5), 625-63. 
4. Thomas M. Hooton (2012). Uncomplicated Urinary Tract Infection. N Engl J Med 366, 1028-
1037. 
5. Lindsay E Nicolle (2008). Uncomplicated Urinary Tract Infection in Adults Including 
Uncomplicated Pyelonephritis. Urologic Clinics of North America 35(1), 1-12. 
6. Colee JG, Fraser AG, Marimion BP, Simmons A (2015). Practical Medical Microbiology. 
India: Churchill Livingstone. 14e. 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. 
Dr.(Maj Gen) Madhuri Kanitkar 
Dean, AFMC Pune, Maharashtra. 
 
2. 
Dr.Muralidhar Varma 
Associate Professor 
Department of Medicine, 
KMC, Manipal.

<<<PAGE 98>>>
93 
 
CHAPTER: 10 
Management of Hospital Acquired Infection (HAI) 
 
10.1 Problem statement 
Hospital acquired infections (HAIs) refer to an infection that was neither present 
nor incubating at the time of admission to a healthcare facility. It is estimated that 
worldwide, over 1.4 million patients suffer from HAI at any given point of time. 
Multidrug resistant organisms are commonly responsible for HAI. The problem is further 
compounded by the severe paucity of new antimicrobials, making treatment extremely 
difficult. 
 
10.2 Factors responsible for HAIs 
 
 10.2.1 Microbial agent 
Patients are constantly exposed to a variety of microorganisms in the hospital. Whether 
contact results in an infection depends on agent related factors such as inoculum of 
infection, virulence of the organism and antimicrobial resistance of the prevailing 
organisms. The source of the organism may be exogenously acquired from another 
person or indirectly via inanimate objects or hands of healthcare workers. It may also be 
endogenous (patient’s own flora) as is the case in Clostridium difficile infections. 
Genes coding resistance determinants are often present on mobile genetic elements which 
spread across hospital environments and species barriers, leading to the emergence of 
multidrug resistant strains of bacteria under antibiotic selection pressure. The normal 
microbiota of patients also changes due to these selection pressures, leading to 
suppression of sensitive organisms to any given drug, while the resistant bugs thrive. An 
example is Acinetobacter baumanni which is intrinsically resistant to a high degree to 
commonly used antibiotics and is able to especially thrive in hospital environments 
inspite of the antibiotic selection pressures. 
 
 
10.2.2 Host factors 
Important host related factors include immune status of the individual, co-morbidities and 
disease processes as well as diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. 
 
10.2.3. Environment 
Hospitals provide a unique environment where there is a mix of infectious sources, 
reservoirs, vehicles of transmission and susceptible hosts interact at close quarters. 
Patients coming into the hospital with an infection or asymptomatic carriage of 
pathogenic microorganisms become primary sources of infection for susceptible patients

<<<PAGE 99>>>
94 
 
and staff. Staff in turn may act as vehicles of transmission to other patients who acquire 
and further the spread of the infection. The busy activity in a crowded hospital with 
frequent transfers of patients from one unit to another, and specialty specific units where 
concentration of highly susceptible patients occurs in one area (e.g. NICU, burn units, 
medical and surgical intensive care units, haemoncology and transplant units), all 
contribute to the development of nosocomial infections. Microorganisms spread through 
contaminated objects, devices, and materials which act as fomites, or through health care 
worker hands, which subsequently come into contact with susceptible body sites of 
patients. 
 
10.2.4 Infection control and HAIs 
The results of the SENIC study carried out almost 33 years ago in the USA, reported that 
with an effective infection control program, the incidence of HAI can be reduced by as 
much as 32% along with a substantial reduction in health care costs. Hospitals in the US 
have been practising infection control and surveillance for over 50 years; have sufficient 
human and medical resource availability, and a comprehensive legal framework backing 
infection control programs, including mandatory surveillance and hospital accreditation 
policies. The situation is far less rosy in developing countries which consequently show 
manifold higher rates of HAIs. Apart from resource constraints, the primary plausible 
causes of these higher rates in developing countries include: 
 Many hospitals lack a formal infection control policy and procedures. 
 There are still no legally enforceable regulations for the implementation of 
infection control programs (e.g. national infection control guidelines). 
 If there is a legal framework, adherence to and compliance with the guidelines is 
irregular. 
 Hospital accreditation is not mandatory in some countries. 
 Low nurse-to-patient staffing ratios, which have proved to be highly connected to 
high HAI rates. 
 Hospital overcrowding. 
 Lack of medical supplies, and 
 Lack of training for nurses and health care workers on infection control. 
 
10.2.5 Impact on patient care and outcomes 
Impact of HAI is measurable in terms of the following: 
● prolonged hospital stay 
● long-term disability 
● increased antimicrobial resistance 
● additional financial burden for health system 
● high costs for patients and their family 
● mortality

<<<PAGE 100>>>
95 
 
As an example, the mortality rate directly attributable to bloodstream infection in 
critically ill patients has been estimated to be 16–40% and the increase in length of stay 
between 7.5–25 days. Less than 36% of population in India has some form of health 
insurance coverage and out-of-pocket payments are still among the highest in the world. 
A study conducted in the cardiothoracic unit of a tertiary care hospital in North India 
revealed that the costs of hospital treatments in patients with HAIs were six times higher 
than that of controls without HAIs, in terms of drug costs, hospital stay, consultation fees, 
cost of antibiotics and investigations. Thus the additional burden of costs attributable to 
these infections has serious implications on the patients. The emergence of drug 
resistance in hospitals has the potential of becoming a global phenomenon with medical 
tourism. 
It is therefore imperative that adequate importance be given to prevention of these 
infections with appropriate infection control policies and procedures as well as 
antimicrobial stewardship based on local and national antibiotic resistance data. 
 
References 
 
1. World Health Organization. Report on the burden of endemic HAI worldwide; a systematic 
review of literature. Geneva. 2011 
2. Hughes, J. M (1988). Study on the efficacy of nosocomial infection control (SENIC Project): 
results and implications for the future. Chemotherapy 34, 553–61. 
3. Tiwari, P. & Rohit, M (2013). Assessment of costs associated with hospital-acquired 
infections in a private tertiary care hospital in India. Value Heal Reg Issues 2, 87–91. 
 
10.3 Surgical Site Infections (SSI) 
 
10.3.1 Introduction 
Surgical site infections are now the most common and costly of all hospital-acquired 
infections, accounting for 20% of all HAIs. With an incidence of 2-5% in patients 
undergoing in-patient surgery, SSIs are associated with increased length of stay on an 
average 9 days and a 2 to 11- fold higher mortality, of which almost 77% may be 
attributed to the infections itself. Perioperative antimicrobials are often the most common 
antimicrobial prescriptions in health care facilities. 
According to the CDC’s NHSN, SSIs are classified by the depth and tissue involved a 
superficial SSI that involves only the skin or subcutaneous tissue, a deep incisional SSI 
involves the fascia and /or muscular layers and an organ space SSI involves any part of 
the body opened or manipulated during a procedure excluding the previously mentioned 
layers (CDC).

<<<PAGE 101>>>
96 
 
10.3.2 Criteria for defining a Surgical Site Infection (SSI) 
10.3.2.1 Superficial incisional SSI 
a. Infection occurs within 30 days after the operation and infection involves only 
skin or subcutaneous tissue of the incision and at least one of the following: 
b. Purulent drainage, with or without laboratory confirmation, from the superficial 
incision. 
c. Organisms isolated from an aseptically obtained culture of fluid or tissue from 
the superficial incision. 
d. At least one of the following signs or symptoms of infection: pain or tenderness, 
localized swelling, redness, or heat and the superficial incision are deliberately 
opened by the surgeon unless incision is culture-negative. 
e. Diagnosis of superficial incisional SSI by the surgeon or attending physician. 
 
10.3.2.2 Do not report the following conditions as SSI: 
a. Stitch abscess (minimal inflammation and discharge confined to the points of 
suture penetration). 
b. Infection of an episiotomy or newborn circumcision site. 
c. Infected burn wound. 
d. Incisional SSI that extends into the fascial and muscle layers (see deep incisional 
SSI). 
Note: Specific criteria are used for identifying infected episiotomy and circumcision sites 
and burn wounds. 
 
10.3.3 Deep incisional SSI 
Infection occurs within 30 days after the operation if no implant is left in place or within 
1 year if the implant is in place and the infection appears to be related to the operation 
and infection involves deep soft tissues (e.g., fascial and muscle layers) of the incision 
and at least one of the following: 
1. Purulent drainage from the deep incision but not from the organ/space component of 
the surgical site. 
2. A deep incision spontaneously dehisces or is deliberately opened by a surgeon when 
the patient has at least one of the following signs or symptoms: fever (>38 ºC), 
localized pain or tenderness unless the site is culture-negative. 
3. An abscess or other evidence of infection involving the deep incision is found on 
direct examination, during reoperation, or by histopathologic or radiologic 
examination. 
4. Diagnosis of a deep incisional SSI by a surgeon or attending physician. 
Notes: 
 
Report infection that involves both superficial and deep incision sites as deep 
 
incisional SSI.

<<<PAGE 102>>>
97 
 
 
Report an organ/space SSI that drains through the incision as a deep incisional 
 
SSI. 
 
10.3.4 Organ/space SSI: 
Infection occurs within 30 days after the operation if no implant is left in place or within 
1 year if implant is in place and the infection appears to be related to the operation and 
infection involves any part of the anatomy (e.g., organs or spaces), other than the 
incision, which was opened or manipulated during an operation and at least one of the 
following: 
1. Purulent drainage from a drain that is placed through a stab wound into the 
organ/space. 
2. Organisms isolated from an aseptically obtained culture of fluid or tissue in the 
organ/space. 
3. An abscess or other evidence of infection involving the organ/space that is found on 
direct examination, during reoperation, or by histopathologic or radiologic 
examination. 
4. Diagnosis of an organ/space SSI by a surgeon or attending physician. 
 
Table 10.1: Classification of surgical wound and their antimicrobial prophylaxis 
Surgical Wound Classification 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis 
 
Class I/Clean: 
 
An uninfected operative wound in which no 
inflammation is encountered and the respiratory, 
alimentary, genital, or uninfected urinary tract is 
not entered. In addition, clean wounds are 
primarily closed and, if necessary, drained with 
closed drainage. Operative incisional wounds 
that follow non-penetrating (blunt) trauma 
should be included in this category if they meet 
the criteria. 
 
None or single perioperative dose of 
cefuroxime/ cefazolin 
Class II/ Clean-Contaminated: 
 
An operative wound in which the respiratory, 
alimentary, genital or urinary tracts are entered 
under controlled conditions and without unusual 
contamination. 
Specifically, 
operations 
involving the biliary tract, appendix, vagina, and 
oropharynx are included in this category, 
Cefazolin or Ampicillin-sulbactam or 
Ceftriaxone or 
(Limited to patients requiring antimicrobial 
treatment for acute cholecystitis or acute 
biliary tract infections which may not be 
determined prior to incision. Factors that 
indicate 
a 
high 
risk 
of 
infectious 
complications 
in 
laparoscopic

<<<PAGE 103>>>
98 
 
 
 
provided no evidence of infection or major break 
in technique is encountered. 
cholecystectomy 
include 
emergency 
procedures, 
diabetes, 
long 
procedure 
duration, intraoperative gallbladder rupture, 
age 
of 
>70 
years, 
conversion 
from 
laparoscopic 
to 
open 
cholecystectomy, 
American 
Society 
of 
Anesthesiologists 
classification of 3 or greater, episode of 
colic within 30 days before the procedure, 
re-intervention in less than one month for 
noninfectious 
complication, 
acute 
cholecystitis, 
bile 
spillage, 
jaundice, 
pregnancy, 
nonfunctioning 
gallbladder, 
immunosuppression) 
Clindamycin or 
Vancomycin 
For procedures in which pathogens other 
than staphylococci and streptococci are 
likely, an additional agent with activity 
against those pathogens could be considered. 
For example, if there is surveillance data 
showing that gram-negative organisms are a 
cause of surgical-site infections (SSIs) for 
the procedure, practitioners may consider 
combining clindamycin or vancomycin with 
another agent like cefazolin, aztreonam, 
gentamicin, or single-dose fluoroquinolone 
if the patient is β-lactam allergic). 
Class III/Contaminated: 
 
Open, fresh, accidental wounds. In addition, 
operations with major breaks in sterile technique 
(e.g., open cardiac massage) or gross spillage 
from the gastrointestinal tract, and incisions in 
which acute, nonpurulent inflammation is 
encountered are included in this category. 
 
Cefuroxime + Metronidazole 
Metronidazole+Aminoglycoside/ 
Fluoroquinolone 
Class IV/Dirty-Infected: 
 
Old traumatic wounds with retained devitalized 
tissue and those that involve existing clinical 
infection or perforated viscera. This definition 
suggests 
that 
the 
organisms 
causing 
postoperative infection were present in the 
operative field before the operation. 
Cefazolin 
+ 
metronidazole, 
cefoxitin, 
cefotetan, ampicillin–sulbactam, ceftriaxone 
+ metronidazole, ertapenem 
Clindamycin 
+ 
aminoglycoside 
or 
aztreonam 
or 
fluoroquinolone 
+ 
metronidazole

<<<PAGE 104>>>
99 
 
10.3.5 Common pathogens 
a. Staphylococcus aureus 
b. E. coli 
c. Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
d. Klebsiella pneumonia 
e. Proteus sp. 
f. Coagulase negative Staphylococcus 
g. Enterococcus sp. 
 
10.3.6 Investigations 
a. Samples: From pus or wound swab 
b. Transport: Immediate transport to the lab 
c. Culture: 
 Aerobic: Blood agar, Mac Conkey agar, 37 0C in air 
 Anaerobic: Brain Heart Infusion agar with hemin and vitamin K (anaerobic 
incubation): 37 0C, under anaerobic conditions 
 Fungal culture (if needed): SDA with appropriate antibiotics/ BHI-BA with 
appropriate antibiotics and incubation temperatures (25 0C and/or 37 0C) 
In culture confirmed cases of SSI/ soft tissue infections, antimicrobials should be 
based on lab AST reports 
 
 10.3.7 Choosing an appropriate prophylactic antibiotic for surgical procedures 
 Antibiotics should be chosen on the basis of their effectiveness against the 
pathogens most likely to be encountered rather than against every possible 
pathogen. Skin flora (eg, Staphylococcus) are the usual target, so the first-
generation cephalosporins are recommended (cefazolin) in most studies. Some 
studies also recommend cefuroxime. 
 Patients with a history of anaphylaxis or urticaria or rash occurring immediately 
after penicillin therapy are at increased risk of immediate hypersensitivity to 
penicillins and should not receive prophylaxis with a beta-lactam antibiotic. 
 
10.3.8 Timing of prophylactic antibiotics 
 Give the first dose within one hour before incision. 
 Antibiotics should be administered before an incision is made to ensure that 
antimicrobial levels in the tissue are adequate and maintained for the duration of 
the procedure.

<<<PAGE 105>>>
100 
 
10.3.9 Route of administration and dose selection: 
Prophylactic antibiotics for surgical procedures should be administered intravenously. 
The dose of an antibiotic required for prophylaxis is the same as that for therapy of 
infection. The full therapeutic dose of an antibiotic should always be given. The upper 
range of the dose should be considered for large patients or those undergoing long 
operations. 
 
10.3.10 Continue no longer than 24 hours postoperatively 
 Most studies have demonstrated efficacy of peri-operative antibiotic prophylaxis 
for only 12 hours or less. Whenever short and long courses are compared, the 
shorter course has proven equally effective. A single dose is as effective as 
multiple doses, and antimicrobial prophylaxis after wound closure is unnecessary. 
 
 Prolonged antibiotic prophylaxis beyond 48 hours is not only ineffective in 
reducing infections but increases antimicrobial resistance and the risk of infection 
with Clostridium difficile. 
 
10.3.11 Re-dose for long surgeries 
 Patients undergoing surgery that extends beyond two half-lives of an antibiotic 
should be re-dosed intra-operatively. 
 An additional dose of prophylactic agent is not indicated in adults unless there is 
blood loss of up to 1500 ml during surgery or haemodilution of up to 15 ml/kg. 
 
Table 10.2: Operations and likely Surgical Site Infection (SSI) pathogens 
Operations 
Likely Pathogens 
Prophylactic antibiotic before 
surgery 
Placement 
of 
all 
grafts, 
prostheses, or implants 
Staphylococcus aureus; 
CoNS 
Cefazolin OR Cefuroxime 
Cardiac 
 
Staphylococcus aureus; 
CoNS 
Cefazolin OR Cefuroxime 
Neurosurgery 
Staphylococcus aureus; 
CoNS 
Cefazolin OR Cefuroxime 
Breast 
Staphylococcus aureus; 
CoNS 
Cefazolin OR Cefuroxime 
Ophthalmic 
S. aureus; CoNS; 
streptococci; 
 Gram negative bacilli 
 Topical moxifloxacin given as 
1 drop every 5–15 min for 5 
doses 
Orthopedic 
Total joint replacement, closed 
fractures/use of nails, bone 
plates, other internal fixation 
devices, 
functional 
repair 
without 
implant/device, 
Staphylococcus aureus; 
CoNS; 
Gram-negative bacilli 
Cefazolin 
 
For ‘below-the-belt’ surgeries, 
Piperacillin-Tazobactam 
+

<<<PAGE 106>>>
101 
 
trauma 
Clindamycin 
Non-cardiac thoracic 
Thoracic 
(lobectomy, 
pneumonectomy 
wedge 
resection, other non-cardiac 
mediastinal 
procedures), 
closed tube thoracostomy 
Staphylococcus aureus; 
CoNS; Streptococcus 
pneumonia; gram-negative 
bacilli 
Cefazolin OR Cefuroxime OR 
Ampicillin-sulbactam 
Vascular 
Staphylococcus aureus; 
CoNS 
 Cefazolin OR Cefuroxime 
Appendectomy 
Gram-negative bacilli; 
anaerobes 
 Piperacillin-Tazobactam 
OR 
Cefoperazone-sulbactam 
Biliary tract 
Gram-negative bacilli; 
anaerobes 
 Piperacillin-Tazobactam 
OR 
Cefoperazone-sulbactam 
Colorectal 
Gram-negative bacilli; 
anaerobes 
 Piperacillin-Tazobactam 
OR 
Cefoperazone-sulbactam 
Gastroduodenal 
Gram-negative bacilli; 
Streptococci; oropharyngeal 
anaerobes (e.g., 
peptostreptococci) 
 Piperacillin-Tazobactam 
OR 
Cefoperazone-sulbactam 
Head 
and 
neck 
(major 
procedures with an incision 
through 
oropharyngeal 
mucosa) 
Staphylococcus aureus; 
streptococci; oropharyngeal 
anaerobes (e.g., 
peptostreptococci) 
 Amoxicillin-clavulanate 
OR 
Ampicillin-sulbactum 
OR 
Cefazolin+metronidazole 
Obstetric and gynecologic 
Gram-negative bacilli; 
enterococci; group B 
streptococci; anaerobes 
Cefazolin 
OR 
Ampicillin-
sulbactam 
Urologic 
Gram-negative bacilli 
 Prophylaxis based on pre-
operative 
urine 
culture 
susceptibility 
pattern 
OR 
Cefazolin, Cotrimoxazole 
 
Table 10.3: Antibiotics for treatment of incisional surgical site infections 
Surgery of Intestinal or Genitourinary Tract 
Single-drug regimens 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 3.375 g every 6 h or 4.5 g every 8 h IV 
Imipenem- 500 mg every 6 h IV/ Meropenem1 g every 8 h IV 
Combination regimens 
 Ceftriaxone 1 g every 24 h + metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h IV 
 Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV every 12 h or 750 mg po x 12 h + metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h IV

<<<PAGE 107>>>
102 
 
Surgery of trunk or extremity away from axilla or perineum 
 Cloxacillin or flucloxacillin 
 Cefazolin 0.5–1 g every 8 h IV 
Surgery of axilla or perineum 
Metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h IV Plus Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV every 12 h or 750 mg po x 12 h 
 
In the ICMR’s surveillance data, 39% of the 12,336 isolates from out-patients and 32% of 
the isolates from ward were from pus samples. Gram negative pathogens accounted for 
76% isolates from the surgical site and 62% from pus, which should have an important 
bearing which framing treatment guidelines, especially, since most guidelines target S. 
aureus.The overall rate of MRSA was 32% for the year 2017. The commonest species of 
CONS were S. haemolyticus and S. epidermidis, the former had MR rate of 86.6% & the 
latter 61%. 
 
The profile of surgical site isolates in the ICMR surveillance data is as under: 
OPD - 
11.6 % 
IPD 
- 
68.6 % 
ICU 
- 
19.8 % 
 
Organisms 
Enterobacteriaceae – 46.20% 
Salmonella – 0.3% 
NFGNB – 27.4% 
Staphylococcus – 7% 
Enterococcus – 16.8% 
Fungi – 0.8% 
Faceal pathogens– 1.5% 
 
Pus samples 
OPD – 33.2% 
Wards – 57.4% 
ICU – 9.3% 
 
Organisms 
Enterobacteriaceae– 38.3% 
Salmonella – 0.1% 
NFGNB – 23.7% 
Staphylococcus – 33.3% 
Enterococcus – 44%

<<<PAGE 108>>>
103 
 
Fungi – 0.2% 
Faecal pathogens – 0% 
 
Considering the AST profile of S. aureus, clindamycin, tetracycline and trimethoprim-
sulphamethoxazole appear to be a reasonable choice for treating suspected S. aureus 
infections. 
The highest susceptibility in Acinetobacter baumannii recovered from pus samples was 
against levofloxacin and minocycline. If we exclude colistin and carbapenems, the same 
for Pseudomonas aeruginosa was seen with amikacin, piperacillin/tazobactam and 
tobramycin and for Enterobactericeae, it was amikacin, levofloxacin and piperacillin-
tazobactam. 
 
References: 
1. Kwak YG et al. Clinical Guidelines for the Antibiotic Treatment for Community-acquired 
Skin and Soft Tissue Infection Infect Chemother 2017;49(4):301-325. 
2. Ban KA et al. Journal of American college of surgeons 2017;224:59-74.Stevens DL, Bisno 
AL, Chambers HF et al.Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Skin and 
Soft-Tissue Infections. Clinical Infectious Diseases 2005; 41:1373–406. 
3. Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF et al. Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Skin and Soft Tissue Infections: 2014 Update by the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. Clinical Infectious Diseases June 18 2014. 
4. Lipsky BA, Berendt AR, Cornia PB et al. 2012 Infectious Diseases Society of America 
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Diabetic Foot Infections. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases 2012; 54(12):132–173. 
5. Steven M. Gordon. Antibiotic prophylaxis against postoperative wound infections Cleveland 
Clinic Journal of Medicine 2006; 73(S1): S42-45. 
6. Joseph S. Solomkin, John E. Mazuski, Ellen J. Baron, Robert G. Sawyer, Avery B. Nathens, 
Joseph T. DiPiro, et al. Guidelines for the Selection of Anti-infective Agents for Complicated 
Intra-abdominal Infections Clinical Infectious Diseases 2003, 37:997–1005 
7. Too Y1, Tanaka S, Kanematsu A, et al.Antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent perioperative 
infection in urological surgery: a multicenter study. J Infect Chemother. 2013 Dec;19(6):1093-
101. 
8. Stephanie H Chang, andAlexander S. Krupnick. Perioperative Antibiotics in Thoracic Surgery. 
Thorac Surg Clin. 2012 February; 22(1): 35–45. 
9. Teena Chopra, Jing J Zhao, George Alangaden, et al. Preventing surgical site infections after 
bariatric surgery: value of perioperative antibiotic regimens. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon 
Outcomes Res. 2010 June; 10(3): 317–328. 
10. Saveli CC1, Morgan SJ, Belknap RW, Ross E et al. F' J Orthop Trauma. 2013 Oct; 
27(10):552-7. 
11. Liu W, Neidert MC, Groen RJ, Woernle CM, Grundmann H. Third-generation cephalosporins 
as antibiotic prophylaxis in neurosurgery: what's the evidence?Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2014 
Jan; 116:13-9.

<<<PAGE 109>>>
104 
 
12. Hawn MT1, Richman JS, Vick CC, et al. Timing of surgical antibiotic prophylaxis and the risk 
of surgical site infection. JAMA Surg. 2013 Jul;148(7):649-57. 
13. Mathur P, Trikha V, Farooque K et al. Implementation of a short course of prophylactic 
antibiotic treatment for prevention of postoperative infections in clean orthopaedic surgeries. 
Indian J Med Res. 2013 Jan;137(1):111-6. 
14. Sharma MS1, Vohra A, Thomas P, Kapil A et al. Effect of risk-stratified, protocol-based 
perioperative chemoprophylaxis on nosocomial infection rates in a series of 31 927 
consecutive neurosurgical procedures (1994-2006). Neurosurgery. 2009 Jun; 64(6):1123-30. 
15. Gupta A, Hote MP, Choudhury M, Kapil A, Bisoi AK. Comparison of 48 h and 72 h of 
prophylactic antibiotic therapy in adult cardiac surgery: a randomized double blind controlled 
trial. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2010 May;65(5):1036-41. 
16. Sharma N, Garg PK, Hadke NS, Choudhary D. Role of prophylactic antibiotics in 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy and risk factors for surgical site infection: a randomized 
controlled trial. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2010 Aug; 11(4):367-70. 
17. Shankar VG, Srinivasan K, Sistla SC, Jagdish S. Prophylactic antibiotics in open mesh repair 
of inguinal hernia - a randomized controlled trial. Int J Surg. 2010; 8(6):444-7. 
 
10.4 Central Line-associated Blood Stream Infection (CLABSI) 
 
10.4.1 Definitions 
 
Central line (CL): A central line is an intravascular access device or catheter that 
terminates at or close to the heart, or in one of the great vessels. The line may be used for 
infusion of intravenous fluids and drugs, or for haemodynamic monitoring. Central line 
(CL) infection can be local (e.g. phlebitis) or systemic. 
 
Catheter-related bloodstream infection (CRBSI) is bloodstream infection (BSI) 
attributed to an intravascular catheter by quantitative culture of the catheter tip or by 
differences in growth between catheter and peripheral venipuncture blood culture 
specimens. This definition is primarily used in research. The BSI should not be related to 
an infection at another site. 
Central Line-Associated Bloodstream Infections (CLABSI) is defined as a laboratory-
confirmed BSI where an eligible BSI organism (see case definition of BSI) is identified, 
and an eligible central line is present on the day/ day before the event. 
 
Eligible Central Line: A CL that has been in place for more than two consecutive 
calendar days, following the first access of the central line, in an inpatient location, 
during the current admission. Such lines are eligible for CLABSI events and remain 
eligible for CLABSI events until the day after removal from the body or patient 
discharge, whichever comes first.

<<<PAGE 110>>>
105 
 
 
10.4.2 When to suspect 
 
CLABSI should be suspected in patients with: 
 Fever in a patient with a central venous catheter with no other apparent source 
 Erythema, induration or tenderness within 2 cm of the catheter exit site 
 Catheter dysfunction (intraluminal clot) 
 Clinical signs of sepsis that start abruptly after catheter infusion 
 
 
10.4.3 Diagnosis 
Confirmation of CLABSI requires both a positive blood culture and a collaborative 
clinical and microbiological review of the patient. 
Blood culture should be obtained prior to initiation of antibiotic therapy. Paired blood 
samples, drawn from the catheter and a peripheral vein, should be sent for culture, and 
the bottles should be appropriately marked to reflect the site from which the samples 
were obtained. If a blood sample cannot be drawn from a peripheral vein, it is 
recommended that 2 blood samples should be drawn through different catheter lumens. 
 
 
The case definition for BSI (must meet one of two criteria): 
Criterion 1: 
 Patient has a recognized pathogen cultured from one or more blood cultures AND 
 Organism cultured from blood is not related to an infection at another site 
 
Criterion 2: 
 Patient has at least one of the following signs or symptoms: fever (>38°C) or 
hypotension AND 
 Organism cultured from blood is not related to an infection at another site 
 Common skin contaminant is cultured from two or more blood cultures drawn on 
separate occasions 
Establishing diagnosis of CRBSI requires the presence of BSI and demonstrating that the 
infection is related to the catheter. The catheter tip should be cultured and growth of >15 
colony-forming units (CFU) from a 5-cm segment tip by semiquantitative (roll-plate) 
culture, or growth of > 102cfu by quantitative (sonication) broth culture of the same 
pathogen as in peripheral blood culture supports the diagnosis of CRBSI. 
 
 
10.4.4 Treatment: 
Empiric antibiotic therapy must be started in sick patients (hypotension, organ 
dysfunction) in suspected CLABSI before culture and susceptibility reports are available. 
The choice of the empiric antibiotics is given in the table. Treatment should be 
appropriately modified after the culture and susceptibility report. 
Systemic antibiotic therapy is usually NOT required if:

<<<PAGE 111>>>
106 
 
1. Positive catheter tip culture in absence of clinical signs of infection. 
2. Positive blood cultures from the catheter with negative cultures through the peripheral 
vein, in absence of clinical signs of infection. 
3. Phlebitis in absence of signs of infection. 
 
Table 10.4: Antibiotics for treatment of CLABSI 
Aetiology 
Suggested regimens 
Remarks 
EMPIRIC 
THERAPY 
 
Gram-negative 
(Klebsiella 
pneumoniae> 
Acinetobacter 
spp.) more 
common than 
Gram positive 
(Staphylococc
us spp., 
Enterococcus 
spp.) 
 
 Preferred 
 Alternative 
 
Imipenem-
Cilastatin 500 
mg IV q6h 
 plus 
Gentamicin (80 
mg IV q8h) 
plus 
Inj. Vancomycin 
(15 mg/kg IV 
q8–12h) 
Or Inj. 
Teicoplanin 
(400mg IV 
every 12h for 3 
doses followed 
by 400mg IV 
q24h) 
Cefoperazone –
Sulbactam (3g IV 
BD) 
 plus 
Gentamicin (80 
mg IV q8h) 
plus 
Inj.Vancomycin 
(15 mg/kg IV q8–
12h) Or 
Inj.Teicoplanin 
(400mg IV every 
12h for 3 doses 
followed by 
400mg IV q24h) 
 
Catheter removal is warranted in 
the following circumstances 
a) Septic shock 
b) Hemodynamic instability 
c) Suppurative thrombophlebitis 
d) Endocarditis or evidence of 
metastatic infection 
e) Persistent bacteraemia after 
72 hours of appropriate 
therapy 
f) CLABSI caused by 
Staphylococcus aureus, 
enterococci, GNB, fungi, 
mycobacteria 
(for short-term catheters) 
 
Duration of therapy for 
uncomplicated bacteraemia- 
10 to 14 days from the day the 
culture was negative 
 
Persistent bacteraemia after 
72 hours of catheter removal- 
treat for 4- 6 weeks 
 
 
Table 10.5: CLABSI due to Gram positive cocci and suggested antibiotics 
 
Etiology 
Suggested regimens 
Remarks 
 Preferred 
 Alternative 
Methicillin-
resistantS. aureus 
Inj. Vancomycin 
(15 mg/kg IV 
q8–12h) 
 Or 
Inj. Teicoplanin 
(400mg IV 
every 12h for 3 
doses followed 
by 400mg IV 
q24h) 
Inj Daptomycin 6 
mg/kg IV q24h 
 
Catheter removal essential. 
 
Following catheter 
removal, a new catheter 
may be placed if additional 
blood cultures demonstrate 
no growth at 72 hours 
 
Duration of treatment at 
least 2 weeks in absence of 
hematogenous

<<<PAGE 112>>>
107 
 
Methicillin 
sensitiveS. aureus 
Cefazolin 2gm 
iv q8h or 
Cloxacillin 2gm 
IV q4h 
 
Inj. Vancomycin 
(15 mg/kg IV q8–
12h) 
 
complications. 
 
Patients with 
hematogenous 
complications- treat for 4-6 
weeks. 
 
Echo to rule out infective 
endocarditis is desirable 
 
A beta-lactam is a 
preferred agent for 
treatment of MSSA. 
Vancomycin is less 
effective and should be 
reserved for patients 
unable to tolerate a beta-
lactam due to allergy/ 
adverse effects 
Methicillin resistant 
Coagulase negative 
Staphylococcus 
(CONS) 
Inj. Vancomycin 
(15 mg/kg IV 
q8–12h) 
 Or 
Inj. Teicoplanin 
(400mg IV 
every 12h for 3 
doses followed 
by 400mg IV 
q24h) 
Inj Daptomycin (6 
mg/kg IV q24h) 
 
Catheter salvage may be 
attempted 
 
 
Duration of therapy for 
uncomplicated 
bacteraemia- 10 to 14 days 
from the day the culture 
was negative 
Methicillin 
sensitive Coagulase 
negative 
Staphylococcus 
(CONS) 
Cefazolin 
2gm iv q8h or 
Cloxacillin 
2gm IV q4h 
Inj. Vancomycin 
(15 mg/kg IV q8–
12h) 
Enterococcus 
Ampicillin 
susceptible 
Ampicillin +/- 
gentamicin (80 
mg IV q8h) 
Vancomycin (15 
mg/kg IV q8–12h) 
+/- gentamicin (80 
mg IV q8h) 
 
Catheter removal is 
encouraged if feasible 
 
Duration of therapy for 
uncomplicated 
bacteraemia- 10 to 14 days 
from the day the culture 
was negative 
 
Ampicillin resistant 
Vancomycin 
susceptible 
Vancomycin 
 (15 mg/kg IV 
q8–12h) +/- 
gentamicin (80 
mg IV q8h) 
Linezolid 
(600 mg q 12h) or 
Daptomycin (6 
mg/kg IV q24h) 
Ampicillin resistant 
Vancomycin 
resistant 
Linezolid 
(600 mg q 12h) 
or Daptomycin 
(6 mg/kg IV 
q24h)

<<<PAGE 113>>>
108 
 
N.B. 
1. For patients with CRBSI for whom catheter salvage is attempted, additional blood 
cultures should be obtained after 72 hours of appropriate antimicrobial therapy. If blood 
culture results remain positive, the catheter should be removed. 
2. Benefit of the antimicrobial impregnated catheter is uncertain. 
 
10.4.5 CLABSI due to Gram negative bacilli 
 
 
For all gram negative infection in patients on short-term catheters, catheter 
removal is essential. 
 
When CLABSI due to gram negative bacilli is suspected, initial empiric coverage 
with antibiotics belonging to two different classes is recommended when MDR 
organisms are prevalent, which may be de-escalated to a single appropriate 
antibiotic, once culture and susceptibility results are available. 
 
Antibiotic lock therapy may be used if catheter salvage is essential, but only in 
combination with systemic antimicrobial therapy. Response to therapy should be 
closely monitored and line removal considered if there is persistent bacteraemia. 
 
Duration of antimicrobial therapy is usually 7-14 days. In patients with gram-
negative bacillary CLABSI involving a long-term catheter and persistent 
bacteraemia or severesepsis despite systemic and antibiotic lock therapy, the 
deviceshould be removed, an evaluation for endovascular infectionand metastatic 
infection should be pursued, and the durationof antibiotic therapy should be 
extended beyond 7–14 days. 
 
Table 10.6: CLABSI due to Gram negative bacilli and suggested antibiotics 
 
Etiology 
Suggested regimens 
Remarks 
Preferred 
 
Alternative
E. coli 
 
Carbapenem 
sensitive 
 
 
 
Imipenem/cilast
atin IV 500 mg 
q6h 
Or 
Meropenem IV 
1g q8h 
Cefoperazone 
Sulbactam(2:l) IV 3 g q12 
h 
Or 
Piperacillin-tazobactam IV 
4.5g q6h 
Third generation cephalosporins 
may be used in E. coli/Klebsiella 
infections if the organism is 
susceptible 
 
When using fosfomycin for 
patients with estimated 
creatinine clearances of 40, 30, 
20, and 10 ml/min, a reduction to 
70%, 60%, 40%, and 20% of the 
daily recommended dose, 
respectively, is proposed. In 
patients undergoing intermittent 
dialysis (every 48 h), 2 g after 
E. coli 
 
Carbapenem-
resistant 
Colistin IV 
9MU loading 
dose and 4.5MU 
q8h 
Fosfomycin IV 4-8g q12h

<<<PAGE 114>>>
109 
 
each session is recommended 
(Falagas CMR 2016) 
 
 
Klebsiella spp 
 
Carbapenem 
resistant 
Colistin IV 
9MU loading 
dose and 4.5MU 
q8h 
plus 
imipenem/cilast
atin IV1g q6h 
Fosfomycin IV 8g q12h 
 
High dose imipenem may be 
combined with colistin when 
imipenem MICs are favourable. 
 
Meropenem is superior to 
Piperacillin- tazobactam while 
treating ceftriaxone resistant, 
carbapenemsensitiveE.coli/ 
Klebsiella infections. 
Klebsiella spp 
 
Carbapenem 
sensitive 
Imipenem/cilast
atin IV 500 mg 
q6h 
Or 
 Meropenem IV 
1g q8h 
Cefoperazone 
Sulbactam(2:l) IV 3 g q12 
h 
Or 
Piperacillin-tazobactam IV 
4.5g q6h 
Klebsiella spp 
 
Colistin resistant 
Fosfomycin IV 
8g q12h 
plus 
Imipenem/cilast
atin IV 1g q6h 
Chloramphenicol 500mg IV 
q6h 
Or 
Doxycycline 50mg IV q12h 
 
Combinations of susceptible 
agents should be used with 
carbapenem, colistin resistant 
Enterobacteriaceae 
Acinetobacter spp 
 
Carbapenem 
resistant 
Colistin IV 
9MU loading 
dose and 4.5MU 
q8h 
Cefoperazone 
Sulbactam(2:l) IV 3 g q12 
h 
Or 
Ampicillin –sulbactam IV 
3g q6h 
Acinetobacter spp 
 
Carbapenem 
sensitive 
Meropenem IV 
1g q8h 
Piperacillin-tazobactam IV 
4.5g q6h 
 
 
 
 
 
Pseudomonas spp 
 
Carbapenem 
resistant 
Colistin IV 
9MU loading 
dose and 4.5MU 
q8h 
Piperacillin-tazobactam IV 
4.5g q6h 
Pseudomonas spp 
 
Carbapenem 
sensitive 
Meropenem IV 
1g q8h 
Or 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam IV 
4.5g q6h 
Ceftazidime 2 g IV q8h 
Or 
Cefepime 2 g IV q8h 
Enterobacter/ 
Citrobacter/ 
Proteus/ Serratia 
Imipenem/cilast
atin IV 500 mg 
q6h 
Or 
 Meropenem IV 
1g q8h 
- 
Burkholderia 
cepacia complex 
Meropenem IV 
1g q8h 
Ceftazidime 2 g IV q8h or

<<<PAGE 115>>>
110 
 
Minocycline 200 mg 
loading dose and 100mg 
q12h 
Stenotrophomona
s maltophilia 
Minocycline 
200 mg stat and 
100mg q12h 
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole 3–5 
mg/kg IV 
q8h 
 
 
 
10.4.6 CLABSI due to pathogenic yeasts 
 
 Catheter removal is essential. 
 Antifungal therapy is recommended for all cases of CLABSI due to Candida 
species. 
 Treat 14 days after first negative blood culture result or resolution of signs and 
symptoms associated with candidemia, whichever is longer. 
 The ophthalmological examination is recommended for all patients. 
 
Table 10.7: CLABSI due to to pathogenic yeasts and suggested antibiotics 
 
Etiology 
Suggested regimens 
Remarks 
Preferred 
 
Alternative
Candida species 
(unspeciated)/ 
C. albicans, 
C. tropicalis/ 
C. parapsilosis 
Micafungin 100 mg 
IV daily 
Or 
Anidulafungin loading 
dose 200 mg, then 100 
mg daily 
Or 
Caspofungin loading 
dose 70 mg, then 50 
mg daily 
Or 
Fluconazole 800-mg 
loading dose, then 400 
mg daily 
Amphotericin B (lipid) 
3–5 mg/kg daily 
Or 
Amphotericin B 
deoxycholate- 0.5–1 
mg/kg daily 
Or 
Voriconazole 400 mg 
(6 mg/kg) q12h for 2 
doses then 200 mg (3 
mg/kg ) q12h 
 
 
Fluconazole may be used 
as a preferred agent/ step 
down agent after 5-7 days 
of initial echinocandin 
therapy if the isolate is 
susceptible; the patient has 
no previous azole 
exposure and is not 
critically ill. 
 
C. auris/ 
C. haemulonii/ 
C. krusei 
Micafungin 100 mg 
daily; 
Or 
Anidulafungin loading 
dose 200 mg, then 100 
mg daily 
 
Voriconazole 400 mg 
(6 mg/kg) bid for 2 
doses then 200 mg (3 
mg/kg ) bid

<<<PAGE 116>>>
111 
 
C. glabrata 
Voriconazole 400 mg 
(6 mg/kg) bid for 2 
doses then 200 mg (3 
mg/kg ) bid 
Or 
Micafungin 100 mg 
daily; 
Or 
Anidulafungin loading 
dose 200 mg, then 100 
mg daily 
 
Fluconazole (step 
down) 800 mg daily 
Or 
Amphotericin B (lipid) 
 
Fluconazole may be given 
as step down therapy in 
high dose if MIC 
favourable. 
 
References 
1. National Healthcare Safety Network. Bloodstream Infection Event (Central Line-Associated 
Bloodstream 
Infection 
and 
Non-Central 
Line-Associated 
Bloodstream 
Infection). http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/PDFs/pscManual/4PSC_CLABScurrent.pdf 
2. Mermel LA, Allon M, Bouza E, et al (2009). Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Intravascular Catheter-Related Infection: 2009 Update by the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. 49(1):1-45. doi:10.1086/599376. 
3. Chaves F, Garnacho-Montero J, Del Pozo JL, Bouza E, Capdevila JA, de Cueto M, Domínguez 
MÁ, Esteban J, et al (2018). Diagnosis and treatment of catheter-related bloodstream infection: 
Clinical guidelines of the Spanish Society of Infectious Diseases and clinical microbiology and 
(SEIMC) and the Spanish Society of Spanish Society of Intensive and Critical Care Medicine and 
Coronary Units (SEMICYUC). Med Intensiva. 42(1):5-36. 
4. Annual report of the Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network January 2017-December 
2017: Publication of ICMR-2018 
5. Chakrabarti, A (2015). Incidence, characteristics and outcome of ICU-acquired candidemia in 
India. Intensive Care Med 41, 285–295. 
6. Falagas ME, Kastoris AC, Kapaskelis AM, Karageorgopoulos DE (2010). Fosfomycin for the 
treatment 
of multidrug-resistant, 
including 
extended-spectrum 
β-lactamase producing, 
Enterobacteriaceae infections: a systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis. 10: 43–50 
7. Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes DR, Clancy CJ, Marr KA, Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Reboli AC, 
Schuster M.G, Vazquez JA, Walsh TJ et al (2015). Clinical Practice Guideline for the 
Management of Candidiasis: 2016 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin. 
Infect. Dis. 62, e1–e50. 
8. Harris,P, Tambyah P, Lye,D et al.The MERINO Trial: piperacillin-tazobactam versus 
meropenem for the definitive treatment of bloodstream infections caused by third generation 
cephalosporin nonsusceptible Escherichia coli or Klebsiella spp.: an international multi-centre 
open-label non-inferiority randomised controlled trial. Abstract presented at the ECCMID 2018 
Congress.

<<<PAGE 117>>>
112 
 
10.5 Pneumonia 
10.5.1 Definitions 
 Hospital Acquired Pneumonia (HAP) is pneumonia that develops 48 hours or 
more after admission and did not appear to be incubating at the time of admission. 
 Ventilator Associated Pneumonia (VAP) is pneumonia that develops after more 
than 48 hours of mechanical ventilation. 
 
10.5.2 When to suspect 
When a patient who is hospitalized/on mechanical ventilation for > 48 hourrs develops 
new or progressive infiltrates on chest radiography and has at least 2 of the following 
features: 
1. Fever> 100.4o F. 
2. Leucocytosis (>12000/µl) or leucopenia (<4000/ µl). 
3. Altered mental status with no other recognizable cause in the elderly. 
4. New onset purulent sputum or change in sputum character. 
5. Worsening gas exchange (i.e. increased FiO2 requirement). 
6. New onset or worsening cough or dyspnea. 
7. Rales or bronchial breathing. 
 
10.5.3 Diagnosis 
HAP: Respiratory samples should be obtained by spontaneous expectoration, sputum 
induction or nasotracheal suctioning and subjected to semi-quantitative cultures. 
 
VAP: The preferred method for lower respiratory tract sample collection (blind or 
targeted, bronchoscopic or non-bronchoscopic) depends upon centre expertise, available 
facilities and cost issues; however, blind endotracheal aspirate is the easiest and 
associated with similar patient outcomes. 
 
10.5.4 Treatment 
Empiric antibiotic therapy should be initiated in VAP/HAP based on clinical criteria after 
sending blood and respiratory tract cultures. The best guide to the empiric regimen is data 
on local microbiological flora and resistance profiles. In absence of such data, the empiric 
choice can be made as mentioned in the table below: 
 
 
Table 10.8: Antimicrobials guidelines for HAP/VAP 
Etiology 
Treatment 
Special Remarks 
 
Preferred/early 
onset/minimum 
prior antibiotic 
exposure 
Alternative/late 
onset/prior 
antibiotic 
exposure 
 
Empiric 
Cefoperazone 
–
Meropenem 
1. Levofloxacin (750 mg IV

<<<PAGE 118>>>
113 
 
(VAP/HAP) 
Sulbactam 
or 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
Either alone or 
with 
Amikacin 
 
Or 
 Imipenem-
Cilastatin 
 
Plus either 
Amikacin 
 
Or 
Colistin/polymyxi
n B* 
*In settings where 
carbapenem 
resistance 
is 
>20% 
q24h) may be used as an 
alternative to amikacin as a 
second 
anti-pseudomonal 
agent. 
2. Consider 
adding 
nebulized 
colistin 
for 
carbapenem 
resistant organisms along with 
IV colistin 
3. Empirical therapy for MRSA 
recommended if prevalence 
>10-20% in the setting 
 
Culture 
proved 
VAP/HAP 
Most commonly 
(Acinetobacter 
baumannii, 
Klebsiella 
pneumoniae, 
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa) 
Choose any one 
according 
to 
culture sensitivity 
from: 
Piperacillin-
Tazobactam 
Cefoperazone 
–
Sulbactam, 
Imipenem-
Cilastatin, 
Meropenem, 
Colistin 
Polymyxin B 
- 
1. Colistin 
and Polymixin B 
should be used only when 
there is resistance to all the 
other tested antibiotics. 
2. For HAP/VAP due to CRE 
who remain in septic shock/ at 
high risk for the poor outcome, 
combination therapy using 2 
antibiotics to which the isolate 
is 
susceptible 
rather 
than 
monotherapy is preferred 
MRSA 
Inj. Linezolid 
 
Inj. Vancomycin 
or 
Inj. Teicoplanin 
 
The choice between vancomycin 
and linezolid to be guided by 
patient-specific factors (renal 
functions, concomitant 
bacteraemia ) 
 
Table 10.9: Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
Antibiotics 
Doses, duration and route of administration 
Cefoperazone –Sulbactam 
(3g IV q12h) 
Inj. Linezolid 
(600 mg IV q12h) 
Inj. Vancomycin 
(15 mg/kg IV q8–12h) 
Inj. Teicoplanin 
400mg IV every 12h for 3 doses followed by 10 mg/kg 
q24h) 
Colistin 
(9MU IV stat followed by 4.5 MU IV q12h or 3MU q8h) 
Polymyxin B 
(15000-25,000 U/kg/day in two divided doses) 
Sulbactam 
(3g IV q12h 
Imipenem-Cilastatin 
(500 mg IV q6h), 
Meropenem 
(1 g IV q8h),

<<<PAGE 119>>>
114 
 
Amikacin 
(15–20 mg/kg IV q24h) 
Imipenem-Cilastatin 
(0.5- mg IV q6h or 1g q8h) 
Meropenem 
(1 g IV q8h) 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
(4.5 g IV q6h), 
Amikacin 
(15–20 mg/kg IV q24h) 
Levofloxacin 
(750 mg IV q24h) 
 
● In susceptible cases, Levofloxacin may be used as an oral step-down therapy. 
● Faropenem should not be used as a step-down therapy in VAP/HAP susceptible to 
Carbapenems. 
● Tigecycline is not recommended routinely in the treatment of VAP. 
● If a patient with suspected VAP has septic shock and rapidly deteriorating status, 
empiric coverage for MRSA and carbapenem resistant GNB can be added along with 
antipseudomonal beta-lactam. 
 
● Antibiotic doses should be adjusted according to GFR and ideal body weight except 
in those with morbid obesity where the dose is calculated using this formula 
= (actual body weight + ideal body weight)/ 
 2 
General comments 
1. De-escalation should be done once the culture reports are available. 
2. Recommended duration of therapy: 7 days if there is a good clinical response or longer 
if clinically indicated (immunodeficiency, empyema, lung abscess, cavitations, 
necrotising pneumonia, etc) 
3. Clinical picture and procalcitonin levels may be used to guide discontinuation of 
antibiotics. 
 
References: 
1. 
Meduri GU (1995). Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of ventilator-associated pneumonia. 
Clin Chest Med16(1):61–93. 
2. 
Kalil AC, Metersky ML, Klompas M, Muscedere J, Sweeney DA, Palmer LB, et al (2016). 
Management of Adults With Hospital-acquired and Ventilator-associated Pneumonia: 2016 
Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the American 
Thoracic Society. Clin Infect Dis 63 (5):e61–111. 
3. 
Torres 
A, 
Niederman 
MS, 
Chastre 
J, 
Ewig 
S 
et 
al 
(2017). 
International 
ERS/ESICM/ESCMID/ALAT guidelines for the management of hospital-acquired 
pneumonia and ventilator-associated pneumonia: Guidelines for the management of hospital-
acquired pneumonia (HAP)/ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) of the European 
Respiratory Society (ERS), European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM),

<<<PAGE 120>>>
115 
 
European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID) and 
Asociacion Latinoamericana del Torax (ALAT). Eur Respir J. 10, 50(3). 
4. 
Torres A, Niederman MS, Chastre J, Ewig S, Fernandez-Vandellos P, Hanberger H, et al 
(2018). Summary of the international clinical guidelines for the management of hospital-
acquired and ventilator-acquired pneumonia. ERJ Open Res 4(2). 
5. 
Gupta D, Agarwal R, Aggarwal AN, Singh N, Mishra N, Khilnani GC, et al (2012). 
Pneumonia Guidelines Working Group. Guidelines for diagnosis and management of 
community- 
and 
hospital-acquired 
pneumonia 
in 
adults: 
Joint 
ICS/NCCP(I) 
recommendations. Lung India, 29(Suppl 2): S27-62. 
6. 
Gupta N, Soneja M, Ray Y, Sahu M, Vinod KS, Kapil A, et al (2018). Nosocomial 
pneumonia: Search for an empiric and effective antibiotic regimen in the high burden tertiary 
care centre. Drug Discov Ther 12(2), 97–100. 
7. 
Pugh R, Grant C, Cooke RPD, Dempsey G (2015). Short-course versus prolonged-course 
antibiotic therapy for hospital-acquired pneumonia in critically ill adults. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 8, CD007577. 
8. 
Peyrani P, Wiemken TL, Kelley R, Zervos MJ, Kett DH, File TM Jr, Stein GE, Ford KD, 
Scerpella EG, Welch V, Ramirez JA (2014). IMPACT-HAP Study Group. Higher clinical 
success in patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia due to methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus treated with linezolid compared with vancomycin: results from the 
IMPACT-HAP study. Crit Care 18(3), R118. 
 
10.6 
Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) 
 
Clostridium difficle infection (CDI) in adults is associated with increased morbidity, 
additional length of hospital stay and an increase in healthcare costs. The available 
literature suggests that the prevalence of CDI is ranging between 4%- 34% across various 
centers in India. In a recent study from a tertiary care centre in Mumbai, the mean 
incidence of CDI was estimated to be 0.2/1000 patient days. The increasing prevalence is 
related to the increasing use of antibiotics across specialities. Management and 
prevention of CDI require an early suspicion, rapid and accurate diagnosis and measures 
for appropriate use of antibiotics. Antimicrobial stewardship programmes need to be 
emphasized for reducing incidence and morbidity associated with CDI. 
 
10.6.1 Which tests should be recommended for rapid diagnosis of C. difficle ? 
Tests should not be performed for asymptomatic patients & do not perform repeat testing 
(within 7 days) during the same episode of diarrhoea (Table 10.10).

<<<PAGE 121>>>
116 
 
Table 10.10: Sensitivity and specificity of the diagnostic methods for CDI 
 
Sensitivity 
Specificit
y 
Turnaround Time 
Glutamate dehydrogenase 
[GDH] plus C. difficile toxic A 
& B assays 
60-90% 
76-98% 
6 hours 
Xpert C. difficile assay (Xpert 
CD assay; Cepheid ) 
90-100% 
94.6-100% 
45 mins 
(Less than 1 hour) 
 
10.6.2 Treatment: 
The treatment strategies for CDI include discontinuing antibiotics as soon as possible, as 
this may influence the risk of CDI recurrence. Therapy for CDI should be started 
empirically only in for fulminant CDI or in situations where a substantial delay in 
laboratory confirmation is expected. 
 
Vancomycin or metronidazole (much less expensive) are both appropriate for an initial 
episode of mild CDI. Vancomycin is the drug of choice for modetate to severe CDI. For 
fulminant CDI, vancomycin administered orally is the regimen of choice. If ileus is 
present, vancomycin can also be administered (as per the vancomycin dosage is 500 mg 
orally 4 times per day) and 500 mg in approximately 100 mL normal saline per rectum 
every 6 hours as a retention enema. Intravenously administered metronidazole should be 
administered together with oral or rectal vancomycin, particularly if ileus is present. The 
metronidazole dosage is 500 mg intravenously every 8 hours (Table 10.11). 
 
If surgical management is necessary for severely ill patients, perform subtotal colectomy 
with preservation of the rectum. Diverting loop ileostomy with colonic lavage followed 
by antegrade vancomycin flushes is an alternative approach that may lead to improved 
outcomes. For children with an initial episode of severe CDI, oral Vancomycin is 
recommended over metronidazole. There are insufficient data at this time to recommend 
the administration of probiotics for primary prevention of CDI outside of clinical trials

<<<PAGE 122>>>
117 
 
Table 10.11: Recommendations for the Treatment of Clostridium difficile Infection 
in Adults 
Etology 
Primary Regimen 
Alternate Regimen 
Initial episode, non-
severe : 
Leukocytosis with a 
white blood cell (WBC) 
count of ≤15 000 
cells/mL and a serum 
creatinine level <1.5 
mg/dL 
VAN 125 mg given 4 times daily 
for 10 days 
 
Oral Vancomycin is not 
available - metronidazole, 
400 mg 3 times per day 
by mouth for 10 days 
Initial episode, 
severe : Leukocytosis 
with a WBC of ≥15 000 
cells/mL or a serum 
creatinine level >1.5 
mg/dL 
VAN, 125 mg 4 times per day by 
mouth for 10 days 
 
Initial episode, 
fulminant : 
Hypotension or shock, 
ileus, megacolon 
VAN, 500 mg 4 times per day by 
mouth or by nasogastric tube. 
If ileus, consider adding rectal 
instillation of VAN. 
 
Intravenously administered 
metronidazole (500 mg every 8 
hours) should be administered 
together with oral or rectal VAN, 
particularly if ileus is present 
 
First recurrence 
• VAN 125 mg given 4 times daily 
for 10 days if metronidazole was 
used for the initial episode. 
 
Use a prolonged tapered 
and pulsed VAN regimen 
if a standard regimen 
was used for the initial 
episode (eg, 125 mg 4 
times per day for 10–14 
days, 2 times per day for 
a week, once per day for 
a week, and 
then every 2 or 3 days for 
2–8 weeks). 
Second or subsequent 
recurrence 
VAN in a tapered and pulsed 
regimen 
 
• VAN, 125 mg 4 times per day by 
mouth for 10 days followed by 
rifaximin 400 mg 3 times daily for 
20 days. 
• Faecal microbiota 
transplantation

<<<PAGE 123>>>
118 
 
Abbreviations: VAN =Vancomycin 
a. All randomized trials have compared 10-day treatment courses, but some patients 
(particularly those treated with metronidazole) may have delayed response to treatment 
and clinicians should consider extending treatment duration to 14 days in those 
circumstances. 
b. The opinion of the panel is that appropriate antibiotic treatment for at least 2 
recurrences (ie, 3 CDI episodes) should be tried prior to offering faecal microbiota 
transplantation. 
 
References: 
1. Kalpesh S Sukhwani, Nitin Bansal, P Senthur Nambi, Suresh Kumar D, V. Ramasubramanian, 
Anil Tarigopula, Nandini Sethuraman, Madhumitha R, Ram Gopalakrishnan. Clinical Profile of 
Clostridium Difficile Associated Diarrhea: A study from Tertiary Care Centre of South India. 
Tropical Gastroenterology 2018;39(3):135-141 
2. Chaudhry R, Sharma N, Gupta N et al. Nagging presence of Clostridium difficile associated 
diarrhoea in north India. Journal of clinical and diagnostic research. 2017; 11(9): 06-09. 
3. Segar L, Easow J, Srirangaraj S, Mohammad Hanifah et al. Prevalence of Clostridium difficile 
infection among the patients attending a tertiary care teaching hospital. Indian J Pathol Microbiol 
2017; 60:221-225. 
4. Kumar GS, Uma BM. Clostridium difficile: A neglected but emerging pathogen in India. Arch 
Clin Microbiol 2015; 6: 1-5. 
5. Tanu Singhal T, Shah S, Tejam R, Thakkar P. Incidence, Epidemiology and Control of 
Clostridium difficile Infection in a Tertiary Care Private Hospital in India. Indian J of Medical 
Microbiol 2018;36 (3): 381-384. 
6. McDonald LC, Gerding DN, Johnson S et al. Clinical practice guidelines for Clostridium difficile 
infection in adults and children: 2017 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
(IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA). Clin Infect Dis 
2018;66(7):e1–e48 
7. Saeam Shin, M.D., Minkyung Kim, M.T., Myungsook Kim et al. Evaluation of the Xpert 
Clostridium difficile Assay for the Diagnosis of Clostridium difficle Infection. Ann Lab Med 
2012; 32:355-358. 
10.7 Catheter associated urinary tract infections 
10.7.1 Introduction 
Catheter-associated urinary tract infection (CA-UTI) is the leading cause ofsecondary 
health care-associated bacteraemia. CA-UTI are the fourth commonest health care 
associated infection (HAI) reported to the National Healthcare Safety Network, making 
up two-thirds of hospital-acquired UTIs (CDC 2019).

<<<PAGE 124>>>
119 
 
In India, exact data for prevalence of CA-UTI are limited. Pooled Indian data for 
catheter-associated urinary tract infection rates for adult and paediatric ICUs were 2.1 
catheter-associated urinary tract infections/1,000 urinary catheter days. Subsequently 
extra length of stay in adult and pediatric ICUs was 10 days and estimated crude extra 
mortality was 6.6% for catheter-associated urinary tract infections in adult and pediatric 
ICUs. 
 
 
Approximately 40% of nosocomial infections originate in the urinary tract. Most patients 
with nosocomial urinary tract infections (UTIs) either had genitourinary or urological 
manipulation or permanent urethral catheterization or both. The daily risk of acquisition 
of bacteriuria varies from 3% to 7% when an indwelling urethral catheter remains in-
situ. While the proportion of bacteriuric subjects who develop symptomatic infection is 
low, the high frequency of use of indwelling urinary catheters resulting in substantial 
increase in CA-UTI burden. 
 
10.7.2 Case definition 
CA-UTI in patients with indwelling urethral, indwelling suprapubic, or intermittent 
a. 
Patient has at least one of the following signs or symptoms compatible with UTI 
with no other identified source of infection 
i. 
New onset fever 
ii. Supra-pubic tenderness 
iii. Costo-vetebral angle pain or tenderness, acute haematuria 
iv. Urinary urgency, urinary frequency, dysuria and 
b. 
 Patient has a urine culture with 1000 colony forming units (cfu)/mL of ≥1 
bacterial species in a single catheter urine specimen or in a midstream voided 
urine specimen from a patient whose urethral, suprapubic, or condom catheter 
has been removed within the previous 48 hrs. 
 
Note: In patients with spinal cord injury, increased spasticity, autonomic dysreflexia, or 
sense of unease are also compatible with CA-UTI. 
Indwelling urinary catheters are generally considered 
a. 
Short term if they are in-situ for <30 days 
b. 
Chronic or long term when in-situ for ≥ 30 days 
10.7.3 Common pathogens associated with CA UTI 
Approximately two-thirds of the uropathogens that cause CA-bacteriuria in patients with 
indwelling urethral catheters are extraluminally acquired (by ascension along the catheter 
urethral mucosa interface), and one-third are intraluminally acquired.

<<<PAGE 125>>>
120 
 
Gram positive cocci 
Gram negative bacilli 
Fungi 
Staphylococcus aureus 
Coagulase negative 
Staphylococcus 
Enterococcus faecalis/ 
E. faecium 
Escherichia coli 
Klebsiella species 
Pseudomonas species 
Proteus mirabilis 
Morganella morganii 
Enterobacter species 
Aceinatobacter species 
Candida species 
The most important predisposing factor for nosocomial UTI is urinary catheterization, 
which perturb host defense mechanisms and provides easy access of uropathogens to the 
bladder. Once attached to the catheter surface, bacteria change phenotypically and 
produce exopolysaccharides that entrap and protect replicating bacteria, forming 
microcolonies and eventually, mature biofilms and they migrate to the bladder within 1–
3 days. Biofilms are usually initially caused by single species but may become 
polymicrobial, especially with long-term catheters. These organisms are often highly 
antimicrobial resistant. 
10.7.4 Risk factors for development of CA-UTI 
 The duration of catheterization is the most important risk factor for developing 
infection. Reducing unnecessary catheter placement and minimizing the duration 
the catheter in- situ are the primary strategies for CA-UTI prevention. 
 Additional risk factors include female sex, older age, and not maintaining a closed 
drainage system. 
 Risk factors for developing hospital onset urinary tract–related blood stream 
infection include neutropenia, renal disease. 
10.7.5 Acceptable Indications for Indwelling Urinary Catheter Use 
 
Management of acute urinary retention and urinary obstruction 
 
Peri-operative use for selected surgical procedures 
 
Accurate measurement of urine output in critically ill patients 
 
Assistance in wound healing for incontinent patients 
 
Required immobilization for trauma or surgery 
 
End-of-Life care 
 
10.7.6 Diagnostic evaluation 
10.7.6.1 Clinical diagnosis 
Signs and symptoms compatible with CA-UTI include new onset or worsening of 
fever, rigors, altered mental status, malaise, or lethargy with no other identified

<<<PAGE 126>>>
121 
 
cause, flank pain, costo-vertebral angle tenderness, acute haematuria, pelvic 
discomfort and in those whose catheters have been removed- dysuria, urgent or 
frequent urination and supra-pubic pain or tenderness. 
10.7.6.2 Collection of urine specimen 
 Short term catheterization - specimens to be obtained by sampling through the 
catheter port using aseptic technique or, if a port is not present, puncturing the 
catheter tubing with a needle and syringe 
 Long term indwelling catheters - preferred method of obtaining a urine 
specimen for culture is to replace the catheter and collect a specimen from the 
freshly placed catheter 
 Symptomatic patient- urine culture should be done immediately prior to 
initiating antimicrobial therapy 
 
10.7.6.3 Laboratory diagnosis 
 Semi-quantitative urine culture -Urine cultures are recommended prior to 
treatment to confirm that an empirical regimen provides appropriate coverage 
and to allow tailoring of the regimen on the basis of antimicrobial 
susceptibility data. 
 Blood culture for patients with suspected bacteremia – hypotension, fevers 
with chills and features of sepsis with organ dysfunction. 
Note: 
• Culture specimens should not be obtained from the drainage bag 
• Do not send urine culture from an asymptomatic patient with indwelling urinary 
catheter 
• Pyuria in urinalysis is not useful in diagnosing CA-UTI 
• Presence or absence of odorous or cloudy urine alone should not be used as an 
indication for urine culture 
• CA-ASB (asymptomatic bacteruria) is diagnosed when one or more organisms are 
present at quantitative counts ≥1,00,000 cfu/ml from an appropriately collected urine 
specimen in a patient with no symptoms attributable to urinary infection 
• CA-UTI - Presence of symptoms or signs compatible with UTI with no other identified 
source along with 1000 cfu/mL of ≥1 bacterial species in a single catheter urine 
specimen or in a midstream voided urine specimen 
10.7.7 Treatment of CA-UTI 
The two important considerations in the management of CA-UTI 
 
Removal of the indwelling catheter (7 days or longer) 
 
Antimicrobial chemotherapy (type and duration of therapy)

<<<PAGE 127>>>
122 
 
Because of the possibility of biofilm formation on the catheter surface, it may be 
reasonable to replace the catheter before the therapy if it has been in place for >7 days 
10.7.8 Antimicrobial Therapy 
 Routine use of prophylactic antimicrobials at the time of catheter removal or 
replacement has not been shown to be beneficial. 
 Empirical treatment should be started with broad-spectrum antibiotics according 
to local susceptibility patterns. 
 
 
Table 10.12: Antimicrobials guidelines for CA-UTI 
Category 
Treatment 
Comments 
Asymptomatic 
CA-ASB 
Not recommended 
Only recommended in the 
following circumstances 
-Before urologic surgery or 
implantation of prosthesis in the 
urinary tract 
-In pregnancy 
Symptomatic 
CA-UTI 
Patients with CA-UTI -not 
severely 
ill/without upper UTI symptoms 
 
Nitrofurantoin 100 mg PO BID 
Fosfomycin 3 g PO once stat 
Levofloxacin 750 mg PO daily 
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg PO BID 
Amikacin 15 mg/kg single dose 
Patients with CA-UTI who are 
severely ill 
-Piperacillin/tazobactam 
4.5 g IV q6hr 
-Ertapenem 1 g IV q24hr 
-Meropenem 1 g IV q8hr* 
* preferably used in patients 
with sepsis and septic shock 
Candiduria – 
Indication 
Symptomatic 
Neutropenia (rule
out candidemia) 
urological 
surgery 
Flucanazole- Susceptible strains 
Flucytosine – 
Candida glabrata 
and Candida krusei 
-Isolation of Candida in urine 
usually suggest a colonization 
-Always rule out obstructive 
uropathy with imaging if 
symptomatic candidal urinary 
infection is suspected 
Post-op infections
following solid 
organ transplant 
with CA-UTI 
(kidney, liver, 
heart, lung) 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g IV 
q6h 
or cefoperazone-sulbactam 3 g 
IVq12h 
Imipenem- cilastatin 1g IV q8h or
Ertapenam 1 g IV q24hr 
/Meropenem 1g IV q8h 
-Obtain blood and urine cultures 
before starting antibiotics 
-De-escalate to narrow spectrum 
agent on receipt of sensitivities 
 
Targeted therapy should be initiated according to urine culture result and tailored 
according to the susceptibility report. For multidrug resistant organisms, colistin may be 
necessary; its empiric use is preferably avoided.

<<<PAGE 128>>>
123 
 
 
10.7.9 Duration of therapy 
 
The optimal treatment duration for CA-UTI has not been well defined. However, 
the IDSA and the European Association of Urology recommend treating CA-UTI 
associated pyelonephritis for 7 days in patients who have timely resolution of 
symptoms and for 10–14 days in those with a delayed clinical response, persistent 
fever, hypotension, or signs of severe sepsis. 
 
In the absence of symptoms indicative of pyelonephritis, women younger than 
65yrs with CA-UTI may be treated for 3 days after the indwelling catheter is 
removed 
 
 
10.7.10 Recommended strategies for CA-UTI prevention 
 Limiting unnecessary catheterization 
 Indwelling catheters should be removed as soon as they are no longer 
required to reduce the risk of CA-UTI 
 Infection prevention - 
a. Hospitals should develop, maintain, and promulgate policies and 
procedures for recommended catheter insertion indications, insertion and 
maintenance techniques, discontinuation strategies, and replacement 
indications 
b. Strategies should include education and training of staff relevant to 
these policies and procedure 
 Alternatives to indwelling urethral catheterization 
Alternative 
Indication 
Intermittent 
catheterization 
Neurogenic 
bladder, 
spinal 
cord 
injury,
Prostate enlargement 
External catheters 
Condom catheters in male patient with no
urinary obstruction and retention 
 
 Prevention of CA-UTI through a bundled 6-C Approaching ICU consisting of six easy-
to-remember elements, this includes “6 Cs” of CA-UTI reduction 
1. 
Consider alternatives 
2. 
Connect with a securement device 
3. 
Keep it Clean 
4. 
Call for bladder scan before irrigating 
5. 
Keep it Closed 
6. 
Culture urine only when indication is clear

<<<PAGE 129>>>
124 
 
References 
1. Parida S, Mishra SK. Urinary tract infections in the critical care unit: A brief review. 
Indian J Crit Care Med. 2013;17(6):370–4. 
2. Mehta Y, Jaggi N, Rosenthal VD, Kavathekar M, Sakle A, Munshi N, et al. Device-
Associated Infection Rates in 20 Cities of India, Data Summary for 2004–2013: 
Findings of the International Nosocomial Infection Control Consortium. Infection 
Control & Hospital Epidemiology. 2016 Feb;37(2):172–81 
3. Tenke P, Bjerklund Johansen TE, Matsumoto T, Tambyah PA, Naber KG, European 
Urologist Association, Urologist Association of Asia. [European and Asian guidelines 
on management and prevention of catheter-associated urinary tract infections]. 
Urologiia. 2008 Dec;(6):84–91 
4. Urinary tract infection (catheter-associated urinary tract infection [CAUTI] Centers for 
Disease 
Control 
and 
Prevention, 
Atlanta, 
GAhttp://www. 
cdcgov/nhsn/PDFs/pscManual/7pscCAUTIcurrent. pdf. 2015 
5. Nicolle LE. Catheter associated urinary tract infections. Antimicrob Resist Infect 
Control. 2014 Jul 25;3:23 
6. Diagnosis, Prevention, and Treatment of Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infection 
in Adults: 2009 International Clinical Practice Guidelines from the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America | Clinical Infectious Diseases | Oxford Academic . Available from: 
https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 
7. Lo E, Nicolle LE, Coffin SE, Gould C, Maragakis LL, Meddings J, et al. Strategies to 
Prevent Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infections in Acute Care Hospitals: 2014 
Update. Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology. 2014 May;35(05):464–79. 
8. Gould CV, Umscheid CA, Agarwal RK, Kuntz G, Pegues DA. Guideline for 
Prevention of Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infections. 2009;61. 
9. Bonkat G, Pickard R, Bartoletti R, Bruyère F, Geerlings SE, Wagenlehner, European 
association of urology guidelines on urological infections. European Association of 
Urology. 2017:22-6. 
10. Urinary Tract Infections - ACCP By Helen S. Lee, Pharm. D., BCPS-AQ ID; and 
Jennifer Le, Pharm. D., MAS 2018. 
11. Treatment guidelines for antimicrobial use in common syndromes. Indian Council of 
Medical Research, 2017. http://www.icmr.nic.in/guidelines/treatment% 20guidelines 
%20for%20antimicrobial. Pdf

<<<PAGE 130>>>
125 
 
Names of the Contributors: 
1. Dr.Nandini, 
Consultant, Dept of Microbiology, 
Apollo hospitals-Main, 
Chennai-600006. 
 
2. Dr B K Rao, 
Chairman and Senior Consultant, 
Institute of Critical Care Medicine, 
Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, 
New Delhi 
 
3. Dr.Manish Soneja, 
Associate Professor, 
Department of Medicine, 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
New Delhi 
 
4. Dr.Samarth Mittal, 
Department of Orthopaedics, 
AIIMS, New Delhi. 
 
5. Dr.Neha Gupta 
Consultant Infectious Diseases, 
Medanta- The Medicity & Fortis Memorial research Institute (FMRI) 
Gurugram, Haryana

<<<PAGE 131>>>
126 
 
CHAPTER: 11 
Infections in Immunocompromised Host 
 
11.1 Prophylaxis and treatment in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation 
(HSCT) 
Infections are an important cause of morbidity, mortality, hospital stay, intensive care 
unit admissions and healthcare cost, besides, healthcare resource utilization in the setting 
of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Infections can occur at different 
stages of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation starting from pre-transplant 
conditioning phase, post-transplant pre-engraftment, post-transplant post-engraftment, 
early post-transplant phase (within 100 days) and late post-transplant phase (after 100 
days). The characteristics of infections (bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic) and the 
subsequent consequences are dependent on the immunity of host, prophylaxis provided 
and other clinical, microbiological, immunological factors. 
 
HSCT is potentially a life-saving procedure in patients with haematological malignancies 
(leukaemia, lymphoma), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), thalassemia and certain 
congenital immuno-deficiency disorders. However, infection remains the principal cause 
of morbidity, mortality, hospital stay and healthcare costs. Prevention of infection and its 
appropriate management in HSCT requires a multidisciplinary approach, which needs to 
include not only BMT physicians but also skilled nursing, high-quality housekeeping and 
adequate Heating Ventilation Air Conditioning (HVAC) system, good water quality, 
quality assured Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD) products, timely and 
appropriately investigation along with necessary antimicrobial treatment. Infection 
control and management in HSCT is a coordination of all those diverse activities to 
ensure better patient outcome. In this brief guideline a summary of the prophylactic and 
therapeutic strategies in HSCT with regard to antimicrobial agents has been provided.

<<<PAGE 132>>>
127 
 
 
Source: Tomblyn M et al. Guidelines for preventing infectious complications among hematopoietic cell 
transplantation recipients: a global perspective. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2009 Oct;15(10):1143-238. 
 
Table 11.1: Antimicrobial prophylaxis and surveillance in HSCT patients 
 
Policy 
Details 
Comments 
BMT pre-engraftment 
Antibiotic prophylaxis 
No antibiotic prophylaxis is given 
 
Surveillance culture 
Stool surveillance culture for multidrug 
resistant bacteria in stool and throat swab 
samples may be done to detect colonization 
with MDR bacteria. Note this should not be 
used to initiate prophylaxis 
This 
detects 
ESBL, 
AmpC, 
carbapenemase producers, MRSA and 
VRE. However patients colonized with 
resistant pathogens should not be 
presumed to be the only cause of fever 
without microbiological confirmation 
Surveillance PCR for 
MDRO colonization 
Stool and throat swab samples from 
patients may be screened for the presence 
of genes indicating colonization with MDR 
bacteria 
These real-time PCR or end point 
multiplex PCR based tests can detect 
NDM, OXA-48, KPC, IMP-1 and VIM 
genes 
associated 
with 
carbapenem 
resistance and mecA genes and VanA 
or vanB genes encoding for MRSA and 
VRE respectively. 
Antifungal prophylaxis 
Posaconazole 
This may be administered IV/oral. 
Blood levels may be monitored if TDM 
(Therapeutic Drug Level) monitoring

<<<PAGE 133>>>
128 
 
facilities are present. If posaconazole is 
contraindicated then alternative agents 
include liposomal Amphotericin or an 
echinocandin 
(e.g. 
Micafungin/Anidulafungin) 
Antiviral prophylaxis 
Acyclovir 
 
Influenza vaccination 
Continued in the post transplant period 
for 6 months for autologous and 1 year 
for allogeneic BMT. 
Yearly vaccination preferably at the 
beginning 
of 
flu 
season 
(April-
September) and at least 2 weeks before 
starting chemotherapy 
CMV surveillance 
Haplo and MUD (Matched Unrelated 
Donor) transplant: 
First CMV viral load at D+14, then every 7-
14 days depending on risk. 
 
Matched sibling transplant: 
First CMV viral load at D+28. 
If CMV viral load is negative then repeat 
viral loads are sent based on risk 
stratification of the underlying disease and 
previous treatment received. 
 
For patients on GVHD treatment: CMV 
viral load once every 2 weeks. 
Consider pre-emptive therapy if 2 
consecutive viral loads (CMV viral load 
1000-10,000 copies/mL) are showing an 
upward trend suggesting possibility of 
progression to CMV disease. 
Start pre-emptive anti-CMV therapy if 
CMV viral load is high (>10,000 
copies/mL). 
Start definitive therapy of CMV disease 
(any viral load) with ganciclovir or 
valganciclovir. 
Note: CMV disease may occur without 
detectable CMV viremia. 
Treatment response assessment once 
every 2 weeks: clinically as well as 
based on CMV PCR. 
Autologous 
transplant: 
no 
CMV 
surveillance 
 
 
 
BMT post engraftment 
Antibiotic prophylaxis 
Stable and engrafted patient: 
 Cotrimoxazole double strength (960 
mg) Q12H for twice weekly for 1 year, 
and 
 Penicillin 400 mg orally Q12H for 1 
year. 
 Penicillin prophylaxis in those with 
splenectomy or those with sickle 
cell anemia to be continued till 14 
years. 
 Penicillin prophylaxis in those 
patients who have not taken 
Pneumococcus, Haemophilus and 
Meningococcal vaccination 
Vaccination following 
splenectomy or 
functional asplenia 
PNEUMOCOCCAL 
CONJUGATE 
VACCINE (13-valent) followed by (at least 
8 
weeks 
later 
by 
PNEMOCOCCAL 
POLYSACCHARIDE 
VACCINE 
(23 
valent) 0.5ML VACCINE) (0.5 ML intra-
muscular upper arm) X 1 stat. 
 
Haemophilus influenzae vaccine 0.5ML 
INJ. (0.5 ML intra-muscular upper arm) X 
1 stat: to be given intramuscularly into the 
VACCINES 
should 
be 
taken 
(Pneumococcal 
+ 
Hib+Influenza+meningococcus) at least 
14 days prior to the splenectomy or 14 
days after splenectomy. All could be 
administered 
simultaneously 
into 
different limbs. 
 
Individuals with a bleeding disorder 
should be given vaccine by deep

<<<PAGE 134>>>
129 
 
upper arm or antero-lateral thigh. A 
reinforcing (booster) dose of Hib vaccine is 
recommended at 12 months. 
 
Influenza vaccine 0.5ML vaccine: (0.5 mL) 
X 1 stat. To be administered yearly at the 
beginning of the Influenza season every 
year; given by intramuscular injection 
should be given preferably into the upper 
arm. 
 
Meningococcal vaccine ACWY 0.5mL 
vaccine (0.5 mL) X 1 stat; All 
meningococcal-containing vaccines are 
given intramuscularly into the upper arm or 
anterolateral thigh. 
subcutaneous injection to reduce the 
risk of bleeding. 
 
 
Re-vaccination with pneumonococcal 
vaccine may be considered 5 years after 
primary vaccination. 
 
Antifungal prophylaxis 
Posaconazole oral syrup: 600-800 mg/ day 
(200 mg Q8H or Q6H); 
Posaconazole IV: Loading dose of 300 mg 
twice a day on the first day, then 300 mg 
once a day thereafter. 
Liposomal amphotericin B 1 mg/kg/day or 
3mg/kg twice weekly. 
Posaconazole/ liposomal amphotericin 
B 
or 
echnocandin 
(Micafungin/Anidulafungin) based on 
oral 
medication 
tolerability, 
requirement of mold active prophylaxis, 
intolerance to azoles (liver function 
derangement, 
hallucination, 
drug 
interaction, etc), and presence of 
GVHD. 
 
Antiviral prophylaxis 
Yearly Influenza vaccination
Yearly vaccination preferably at the 
beginning 
of 
flu 
season 
(April-
September) and at least 2 weeks before 
starting chemotherapy. Please note the 
recommended 
vaccine 
composition 
(northern/southern 
hemispheric 
vaccine) from 
the WHO website 
updated twice yearly 
 
Table 11.2: Antimicrobial therapy in the bone marrow transplant setting 
 
Clinical 
Condition 
Common 
Pathogens 
Empirical 
Antimicrobial 
Agents 
Alternate Antimicrobial 
Agents 
Comments 
Febrile 
Neutropenia 
(FN)/ sepsis 
Escherichia coli, 
Klebsiella 
pneumoniae, 
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, 
Acinetobacter 
species, 
Staphylococcus 
aureus, 
Coagulase 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam + 
amikacin 
 
First line: Piperacillin-
tazobactam + amikacin 
Second line: 
Meropenem± 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin 
Third line or patient in 
septic shock: 
Meropenem+ 
Colistin/Polymyxin B± 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin 
Continue 
broad-spectrum 
antibiotics until the patient 
is afebrile for at least 2 
days and the neutrophil 
count is >500 cells/mm3 on 
at least one occasion. If 
blood cultures are negative 
at 
3 
days 
following 
initiation of antibiotic the 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin

<<<PAGE 135>>>
130 
 
Negative 
Staphylococci, 
Enterococcus 
species, Candida 
species 
+ caspofungin± 
Fosfomycin/Tigecycline 
may be discontinued. 
Note: Fosfomycin should 
be 
considered 
only 
in 
patients 
where 
Colistin 
Resistant 
Klebsiella/E. 
coli/Enterobacter 
are 
suspected. 
Community 
acquired 
pneumonia 
(CAP) 
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, 
Haemophilus 
influenzae, atypical 
agents 
(Mycoplasma, 
Chlamydia, 
Legionella), 
respiratory viruses 
(influenza A, 
influenza B, RSV, 
parainfluenza, 
rhinovirus, 
Enterovirus, human 
Metapneumovirus, 
Adenovirus, 
Coronavirus) 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam+ 
clarithromycin/ 
azithromycin 
Meropenem+ 
clarithromycin or 
azithromycin+ 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin 
If 
viral 
infection 
is 
suspected consider sending 
respiratory sample (nose 
and throat swab in viral 
transport 
media/ 
BAL/ 
endotracheal secretion) for 
respiratory viral PCR and 
consider early empirical use 
of oseltamivir. Oseltamivir 
may be discontinued once 
influenza PCR is negative 
Health Care 
Associated 
Pneumonia 
(HAP) 
E. coli, Klebsiella, 
Pseudomonas, 
Acinetobacter, 
Staphylococcus 
aureus (methicillin 
resistant and 
methicillin 
sensitive) 
Meropenem+ 
Polymyxin B+ 
Teicoplanin/Vanco
mycin 
 
 
Consider use of colistin 
with 
meropenem 
and 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin in 
case of severe infection 
requiring 
respiratory 
support (ventilation) and 
this may be discontinued 
once cultures are negative 
and patient is stable. Also 
consider use of aerosolized 
colistin as an adjunct to 
intravenous antibiotics in 
the treatment of multi-drug 
resistant pathogens 
Blood stream 
infection 
E. coli, Klebsiella, 
Pseudomonas, 
Acinetobacter, 
Staphylococcus 
aureus (methicillin 
resistant and 
methicillin 
sensitive), 
Staphylococcus 
epidermidis, 
Enterococcus 
species, Candida 
(albicans and non-
albicans species of 
Candida) 
Stable patient: 
meropenem + 
amikacin 
 
 
Second line/Unstable 
patient: Meropenem± 
Colistin ± 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin 
± 
caspofungin 
Duration 
of 
treatment 
depends on the source of 
blood stream infection

<<<PAGE 136>>>
131 
 
Intravenous 
catheter 
associated 
infection 
Staphylococcus 
aureus, Staph. 
epidermidis, 
Coliforms 
(Enterobacteriacea
e) and non-
fermentative Gram 
negative bacilli 
Meropenem+ 
Vancomycin 
Meropenem+ 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin
+colistin 
Consider 
the 
use 
colistin/Polymyxin 
B 
or 
anti-fungal agents based on 
specific clinical/laboratory 
diagnosis 
Skin and soft 
tissue 
infection 
Staphylococcus 
aureus, 
Streptococcus 
species, coliforms 
and non-
fermentative Gram 
Negative Bacilli (in 
compromised host), 
Candida, 
Zygomycetes, 
Aspergillus, 
Fusarium 
Piperacillin-
Tazobactam + 
Teicoplanin/ 
Vancomycin 
Necrotizing fasciitis: 
Meropenem+ 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin 
+ Clindamycin 
Consider the use of anti-
fungal agents based on 
specific clinical/laboratory 
diagnosis. 
For 
MRSA 
coverage consider use of 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin. 
Consider 
the 
use 
of 
clindamycin where anti-
toxin activity is desired 
(e.g. necrotizing fasciitis). 
Intra-
abdominal 
infection 
Coliforms and non-
fermentative Gram 
Negative Bacilli, 
Anaerobes, 
Enterococcus 
species, Candida 
Piperacillin-
Tazobactam+ 
Amikacin ± 
metronidazole 
Meropenem+ 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin 
± metronidazole 
Consider the use of anti-fungal 
agents 
based 
on 
specific 
clinical/laboratory diagnosis 
Note: 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam/meropenem 
provides 
good 
anaerobic 
cover. 
Addition 
of 
metronidazole 
to 
be 
considered only if enhanced 
anaerobic 
coverage 
is 
considered essential. 
Urinary Tract 
infection 
Coliforms and non-
fermentative Gram 
Negative Bacilli, 
Enterococcus 
species, Coagulase 
negative 
Staphylococci, 
Candida 
Piperacillin-
Tazobactam+ 
Amikacin 
Meropenem+ 
Teicoplanin/Vancomycin 
Consider the use of anti-
fungal agents based on 
specific clinical/laboratory 
diagnosis 
Antibiotic 
associated 
diarrhoea 
Clostridium 
difficile 
Oral metronidazole Oral vancomycin 
Oral vancomycin may be 
used as first line in severe 
infections 
Invasive 
pulmonary 
aspergillosis 
Aspergillus 
flavus, 
Aspergillus 
fumigatus, 
Aspergillus 
nidulans, 
Aspergillus niger, 
Aspergillus 
terreus 
Voriconazole 
Amphotericin B 
(preferably liposomal, 
otherwise conventional) 
Duration of therapy: ~ 6 
weeks. Treatment should be 
continued until lesions have 
resolved 
or 
clinically 
stable. 
Consider 
doing 
voriconazole 
therapeutic 
drug 
level 
monitoring 
(TDM) wherever feasible. 
Mucormycos
is 
Apophysomyces, 
Basidiobolus, 
Conidiobolus, 
Liposomal 
Amphotericin B 
with Surgical 
Caspofungin 
may 
be 
considered 
along 
with 
liposomal amphotericin B 
Surgical debridement as far 
as 
possible. 
Antifungal 
therapy for mucormycosis

<<<PAGE 137>>>
132 
 
Cunninghamella, 
Mortierella, 
Mucor, 
Lichtheimia 
(Absidia), 
Rhizomucor, 
Rhizopus, 
Saksenaea, 
Syncephalestrum 
debridement 
(wherever feasible) 
should be continued until: 
there is resolution of clinical 
signs 
and 
symptoms 
of 
infection, there is resolution 
or stabilization of residual 
radiographic signs, there is 
resolution 
of 
underlying 
immunosuppression. 
Adjunctive therapies may be 
tried in case of non response. 
Herpes 
simplex 
Herpes Simplex 
Virus Type 1 and 
Type 2 (HSV1, 
HSV2) 
 
Acyclovir or 
Valacyclovir 
Foscarnet 
Dose and Duration of 
therapy depends on organ 
involvement. 
Varicella or 
disseminated 
zoster or 
localized 
zoster 
Varicella Zoster 
Virus 
Acyclovir 
or 
Valacyclovir 
Foscarnet 
Intravenous 
therapy 
is 
recommended in all severe 
and complicated cases. 
CMV 
reactivation 
or disease 
(colitis, 
pneumonitis, 
hepatitis, 
retinitis, 
encephalitis) 
Cytomegalovirus 
Ganciclovir or 
Valgancyclovir 
Foscarnet or Cidofovir 
Treat 
till 
resolution 
of 
clinical 
symptoms 
and 
signs 
or 
resolution 
of 
viremia (2 negative viral 
load reports). In case of 
treatment 
failure 
with 
Ganciclovir, foscarnet is 
the drug of choice. 
Pneumocystis 
jirovecii 
pneumonia 
Pneumocystis 
jirovecii 
Co-trimoxazole (10-
15 mg/kg of TMP 
component in 
divided doses 
Clindamycin+ Primaquine 
Duration of therapy: 21 days 
Corticosteroids to be 
considered as an adjunctive 
therapy along with 
antimicrobial therapy against 
PCP. 
 
References: 
1. Chandy M, Bhattacharya S, Chawla T. Antimicrobial Guidelines for prophylaxis and treatment 
of Infections in Bone Marrow Transplant settings. In: ICMR guideline on Treatment Guidelines 
for Antimicrobial Use in Common Syndromes. Indian Council of Medical Research, 
Department 
of 
Health 
Research, 
New 
Delhi, 
India, 
2017. 
Pages 
20-32. 
http://www.icmr.nic.in/guidelines/treatment%20guidelines%20for%20antimicro bial.pdf 
 
Names of the Contributors: 
1. Dr. Mammen Chandy, 
 Director and Clinical Haematologist, 
Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, India 
 
2. Dr. Sanjay Bhattacharya 
 Consultant Microbiologist, 
Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, India

<<<PAGE 138>>>
133 
 
11.2 Solid organ transplant 
 
 
11.2.1 Introduction 
 
For the last three decades, solid organ transplantation (SOT) has been an accepted mode 
of therapy for the terminal disease of organs including the kidneys, liver, heart and lungs 
and less frequently intestine and pancreas. Immunosuppressive therapy is an essential 
component deciding the acceptability of the transplanted organ and it predisposes 
recipients of SOT to infectious sequelae. Optimal management of infectious 
complications in SOT recipients is an important deciding factor of care for this 
immunocompromised and highly susceptible population. 
 
11.2.2 Common pathogens 
Immunocompromised hosts remain exposed to normal community acquired pathogens 
and are at risk of developing opportunistic infections. The pathogens involved are by and 
large the same as those affecting immune competent hosts. Some specific pathogens 
unique to patients with compromised cell mediated immunity include Listeria 
monocytogenes, Nocardia spp, Pneumocystis jirovecii, cytomegalovirus (CMV), 
Cryptococcus neoformans, Aspergillus spp, Strongyloides stercoralis, etc. 
 
SOT recipients are at risk of acquiring infections from donors with active or latent 
infections at the time of harvesting the organ. The organ being transplanted is a critical 
determinant of the location of infection in the immediate post-operative period. The 
chest, abdomen and urinary tract are the most common sites of infection in recipients of 
thoracic, liver and kidney transplantation, respectively. Intra-operative factors including 
events during surgery also contribute to infectious complications. Four weeks after 
transplant, immunosuppression is the major risk factor predisposing to infection. 
 
The time of infectious event relative to the time of surgery may have an important 
bearing on the type of infection. Early infections (0–30 days after transplant) are usually 
associated with preexisting conditions or complications of surgery. Bacteria and yeast are 
the most frequent pathogens. Donor-derived infections usually present during this period. 
The intermediate period (31–180 days after transplant) is usually complicated by 
infections due to latent pathogens from donor organs, blood products, those re-activated 
in the recipient and the classical opportunistic agents. In the later period (beyond 180 
days after transplantation), infection risks depend on immunosuppression and exposures.

<<<PAGE 139>>>
134 
 
Table 11.3: Central nervous system infections 
Clinical 
condition 
Common 
pathogens 
Empirical 
antimicrobi
al agents 
Alternative 
antimicrobi
al agents 
Comments 
Acute 
bacterial 
meningitis 
S. pneumoniae, 
Listeria 
monocytogenes, 
Haemophilus 
influenzae, 
Neisseria 
meningitidis 
Ceftriaxone 
or 
cefotaxime 
plus 
ampicillin 
(for listeria) 
Plus 
vancomycin 
 
 
Moxifloxacin 
or 
meropenem 
Exclude TB, Cryptococcus 
 
 
If 
penicillin 
allergic, 
use 
cotrimoxazole 
(TMP 
component) or meropenem to 
cover for Listeria 
Duration: 10-14 days, 21 days 
for Listeria or gram-negative 
infections 
Brain 
abscess, 
subdural 
empyema 
Streptococci, 
Bacteroides spp, 
Enterobacteriace
ae, S. aureus, 
TB, 
Nocardia, 
Aspergillus 
 
 
Ceftriaxone 
or 
cefotaxime 
plus 
Metronidazol
e 
 
Duration 
based 
on 
clinical 
and 
radiological 
response, 
minimum 
8 
weeks 
Meropenem 
 
Aspiration / surgical drainage 
required 
unless 
abscess 
<2.5cm 
and 
patient 
neurologically stable 
Nocardia spp 
Co-
trimoxazole 
(TMP 
component) 
IV/PO 
plus 
imipenem/ce
ftriaxone 
Linezolid 
Duration: 3-6 weeks of IV 
therapy followed by 12 months 
PO 
 
Table 11.4: Respiratory tract infections 
Clinical 
condition 
Common 
pathogens 
Empirical 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Alternative 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Comments 
Pneumonia 
 
 
 
 
 
S. pneumoniae, 
H. 
influenzae, 
Legionella spp, 
K. pneumoniae, 
P. aeruginosa, 
Acinetobacter 
spp 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
plus 
azithromycin 
or
doxycycline 
 
Duration 5-7 days 
Imipenem-
cilastatin 
If 
MRSA 
is 
a 
concern, 
add 
linezolid. 
Avoid 
fluoroquinolones 
unless TB excluded. 
Consider 
TB, 
influenza, Nocardia, 
fungi.

<<<PAGE 140>>>
135 
 
Pneumocystis 
jirovecii 
Co-trimoxazole 
Clindamycin 
plus 
primaquine 
(if 
sulpha allergy) 
 
Lung 
abscess, 
empyema 
S. pneumoniae, 
viridans 
streptococci, 
K. pneumoniae, 
P. aeruginosa, 
S. aureus 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
+ 
clindamycin 
Drainage of pleural 
space essential for 
empyema. 
Duration: 3-4 weeks 
Acute 
bacterial 
pharyngitis
Streptococcus 
pyogenes 
Benzathine 
penicillin 
or 
amoxycillin 
 
Most 
cases 
viral. 
Confirm 
bacterial 
etiology 
before 
antibiotic Rx 
Head 
& 
neck space 
infections 
Polymicrobial, 
S. pyogenes, 
S. 
aureus, 
viridans 
streptococci, 
oral anaerobes 
Clindamycin 
or 
amoxy-clav 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
 
Acute 
sinusitis 
Viral, 
S. pneumoniae, 
H. 
influenzae, 
M. catarrhalis 
Amoxy-clav 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
Exclude 
fungal 
etiology 
Acute 
bronchitis 
Mostly viral 
 
 
Antibiotics 
not 
needed 
 
Table 11.5: Gastrointestinal and intra-abdominal infections 
Clinical 
condition 
Common pathogens 
Empirical 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Alternative 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Comments 
Acute 
gastroenteritis
Viral, 
enterotoxigenic 
& 
enteropathogenic 
E. coli 
None 
None 
Rehydration 
(oral/IV) essential 
Food 
poisoning 
S. aureus, B. cereus 
None 
None 
Rehydration 
(oral/IV) essential 
Cholera 
V. cholera 
Doxycycline 
Azithromycin 
or ciprofloxacin 
Rehydration 
(oral/IV) essential 
Bacterial 
dysentery 
Shigella, 
Campylobacter, 
Salmonella, E. coli 
Ceftriaxone 
Azithromycin 
 
Amoebic 
dysentery 
E. histolytica 
Metronidazole 
Tinidazole 
Add 
diloxanide 
furoate 500mg q 
8h for 7-10 days 
Biliary 
tract 
infections 
Enterobacteriaceae 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or
Cefoperazone-
Imipenem-
cilastatin 
500mg 
q 
6h
Surgical 
or 
endoscopic 
intervention may

<<<PAGE 141>>>
136 
 
sulbactam 
or 
ertapenem 
or 
meropenem 1g 
IV q 8h 
be considered for 
biliary obstruction 
Spontaneous 
bacterial 
peritonitis 
Enterobacteriaceae 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
or
ertapenem 
Imipenem-
cilastatin 
or 
meropenem 
 
Secondary 
peritonitis, 
intra-
abdominal 
abscess 
Enterobacteriaceae 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
or 
ertapenem 
Imipenem-
cilastatin 
or 
meropenem 
Source control is 
important 
 
Table 11.6: Skin and soft tissue infections 
Clinical 
condition 
Common 
pathogens 
Empirical 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Alternative 
antimicrobial agents 
Comments 
Cellulitis 
S. 
pyogenes, 
S. 
aureus (MSSA) 
Cefazolin 
Clindamycin 
Shift to oral 
when 
improving 
Abscess, 
carbuncle 
S. aureus 
Clindamycin 
 Linezolid 
Cover 
for 
MRSA 
till 
sensitivities 
back 
 
MSSA 
Cefazolin 
 
MRSA 
Vancomycin 
Clindamycin 
 
Necrotizing 
fascitis 
S. 
pyogenes, 
S. 
aureus, anaerobes, 
Enterobacteriaceae
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
plus
Clindamycin 
Imipenem-cilastatin 
or 
meropenem 
plus 
Clindamycin 
Early 
surgical 
debridement 
essential 
 
Table 11.7: Urinary tract infections 
Clinical 
condition 
Common 
pathogens 
Empirical 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Alternative 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Comments 
Cystitis 
Enterobacteria
ceae 
Nitrofurantoin 
Co-trimoxazole 
or 
ciprofloxacin 
Collect urine for 
culture 
before 
antibiotics 
Acute 
pyelonephritis
Enterobacteria
ceae 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or Cefoperazone- 
sulbactam 
or ertapenem 
Imipenem-
cilastatin 
or 
meropenem 
Collect urine for 
culture 
before 
antibiotics. 
Duration 
10-14 
days

<<<PAGE 142>>>
137 
 
Acute 
prostatitis 
Enterobacteria
ceae 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
or 
ertapenem 
Co-trimoxazole 
Collect 
urine 
or 
preferably prostatic 
fluid 
for 
culture 
before antibiotics. 
Duration 3-4 weeks 
Chronic 
prostatitis 
Enterobacteria
ceae 
Ciprofloxacin 
Co-trimoxazole 
Collect 
urine 
or 
preferably prostatic 
fluid 
for 
culture 
before antibiotics 
 
Table 11.8: Bone and joint infections 
Clinical 
condition 
Common 
pathogens 
Empirical 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Alternative 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Comments 
Acute 
osteomyelitis, 
septic 
arthritis 
S. aureus, 
S. 
pyogenes, 
Enterobacteriac
eae 
Inj 
Vancomycin 
plus 
Inj 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or 
 
plus 
Clindamycin 
Treatment based 
on culture results. 
Surgical 
debridement 
essential 
Chronic 
osteomyelitis 
 
 
 
Definitive therapy 
based on culture 
result 
 
Table 11.9: Severe sepsis and septic shock of unknown source 
Clinical 
condition 
Common pathogens Empirical 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Comments 
Community 
acquired 
Enterobacteriaceae, 
P. aeruginosa, 
S. aureus 
Imipenem-cilastatin 
 
or 
meropenem 
Add vancomycin if 
S. 
aureus 
is 
a 
concern. 
Add 
colistin 
or 
polymyxin B if risk 
factors 
Hospital 
acquired 
Enterobacteriaceae, 
P. 
aeruginosa, 
Acinetobacter spp, 
 S. aureus 
Imipenem or meropenem 
plus 
polymyxin B or colistin plus 
vancomycin 
 
 
Table 11.10: Post-operative infections following solid organ transplant 
Clinical 
condition 
Common 
pathogens 
Empirical 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Alternative 
antimicrobial 
agents 
Comments 
Post-
Usually of non-
None 
 
Rule out non-

<<<PAGE 143>>>
138 
 
operative 
fever without 
hemodynamic 
instability 
infectious etiology 
infectious 
causes, 
hematoma, 
DVT, 
transfusion 
fever, etc. 
Surgical site 
infection 
S. aureus, 
Enterobacteriaceae, 
P. aeruginosa 
 
 
Treatment 
based 
on 
culture results 
VAP/HAP 
P. aeruginosa, 
Acinetobacter spp, 
Enterobacteriaceae 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
or 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
 
Colistin may 
be considered 
based on local 
epidemiology 
or 
culture 
results 
CLABSI 
S. aureus, 
Enterobacteriaceae, 
P. aeruginosa, 
Acinetobacter spp 
Imipenem-
cilastatin 
or 
meropenem 
or
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
plus 
Vancomycin 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam plus 
Vancomycin 
Colistin may 
be considered 
based on local 
epidemiology 
CAUTI 
Enterobacteriaceae, 
P. aeruginosa, 
enterococci 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam 
 
or 
Cefoperazone-
sulbactam 
Imipenem-
cilastatin 
or meropenem 
Collect urine 
for 
culture 
before 
antibiotics 
 
Table 11.11. Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for central nervous system 
infections 
Antibiotics 
Doses and duration 
Ceftriaxone
2 g IV q 12h
Cefotaxime
2 g IV q 4-6h
Ampicillin
2 g IV q 4h
Vancomycin
1g IV q8-12h
Moxifloxacin
400 mg IV q 24h
Meropenem 
2 g IV q 8h
cotrimoxazole 
15 mg/kg/day
Ceftriaxone 
2 g IV q 12h 
Metronidazole 
1 g IV q 12h 
Co-trimoxazole 
15 mg/kg 
Linezolid 
600 mg IV or PO q 12h

<<<PAGE 144>>>
139 
 
Table 11.12. Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for respiratory tract infections 
Antibiotics 
Doses and duration 
Piperacillin-tazobactam
4.5 g IV q 6h
Azithromycin 
500 mg PO/IV OD
Doxycycline 
100 mg PO q 12h
Imipenem-cilastatin 
500 mg q 6h
Linezolid 
600 mg IV/PO BD
Co-trimoxazole 
(TMP 15 mg/kg/day) for 14 days (21 days if HIV positive)
Clindamycin 
600 mg IV q 8h
Primaquine 
15 mg q 12h 
Cefoperazone-sulbactam 
+ 
clindamycin 
3 g IV q 12h + 600-900 mg IV q 8h 
Benzathine penicillin 
1.2 MU IM 
Amoxycillin 
500 mg PO q 8h for 7 days 
Amoxy-clav 
1.2g IV/PO q 8h for 1 week 
 
Table 11.13. Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for gastrointestinal and intra-
abdominal infections 
Antibiotics 
Doses and duration 
Doxycycline 
300 mg PO stat
Azithromycin 
1 g PO stat (Cholera)
Ciprofloxacin
500 mg q 12h for 3 days
Ceftriaxone 
2 g IV OD for 5 days
Azithromycin 
1 g OD for 3 days (Bacterial dysentery)
Metronidazole 
500-750 mg IV/PO q 8h for 7-10 days
Tinidazole 
2 g PO OD for 3 days
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
4.5 g IV q 6h 
Cefoperazone-sulbactam 
3 g IV q 12h 
Ertapenem 
1 g IV OD 
Imipenem-cilastatin 
500 mg q 6h 
Meropenem 
1g IV q 8h 
 
Table 11.14. Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for skin and soft tissue 
infections 
Antibiotics 
Doses and duration 
Cefazolin 
2 g IV q 8h for 5-7 days
Clindamycin 
600-900 mg IV q 8h
Linezolid 
600 mg iv q12h 
Cefazolin 
2 g IV q 8h for 5-7 days
Vancomycin 
1 g IV q 12h
Piperacillin-tazobactam
4.5 g IV q 6h
Cefoperazone-sulbactam
3 g IV q 12h
Imipenem-cilastatin 
500 mg q 6h
Meropenem 
1 g IV q 8h

<<<PAGE 145>>>
140 
 
Table 11.15. Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for urinary tract infections 
Antibiotics 
Doses and duration 
Nitrofurantoin 
100 mg q 12h for 5 days
Co-trimoxazole 
DS BD
Ciprofloxacin 
500 mg BD for 3 days (Cystitis) 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
4.5 g IV q 6h
Cefoperazone-sulbactam
3 g IV q 12h
Ertapenem
1 g IV OD
Imipenem-cilastatin 
500 mg q 6h
Ciprofloxacin 
750 mg PO BD (Chronic prostatitis)
 
Table 11.16. Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for urinary tract infections 
Antibiotics 
Doses and duration 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
4.5 g IV q 6h
Clindamycin
600-900 mg IV q 8h
 
Table 11.17. Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for severe sepsis and septic 
shock of unknown source 
 
 
 
Table 11.18. Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for Post-operative infections 
following solid organ transplant 
Antibiotics 
Doses and duration 
Piperacillin-tazobactam 
4.5 g IV q 6h
Cefoperazone-sulbactam
3 g IV q 12h
Imipenem-cilastatin 
500 mg q 6h
Meropenem 
1 g IV q 8h 
Vancomycin 
1 g IV q 12h 
 
References 
1. Gupta D, Agarwal R, Aggarwal AN, Singh N, Mishra N, Khilnani G C, Samaria J K, Gaur S N, 
Jindal S K. Guidelines for diagnosis and management of community-and hospital-acquired 
pneumonia in adults: Joint ICS/NCCP(I) recommendations. Lung India 2012;29, Suppl S2:27-
62. 
2. Raja Dhar. Pneumonia: Review of Guidelines Supplement to JAPI January 2012 Vol. 60, 25-28. 
3. Ajitpal Singh Gill et al. Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis in alcoholic cirrhosis - An Indian 
perspective. Eurasian Journal of Hepato- Gastroenterology, Jan-June 2012; (2) 1:14-19. 
Antibiotics 
Doses and duration 
Imipenem-cilastatin
500 mg q 6h
Meropenem
1 g IV q 8h
Imipenem 
1 g q 8h

<<<PAGE 146>>>
141 
 
4. Shree N, Arora BS, Mohil RS, Kasana D, Biswal I. Bacterial profile and patterns of 
antimicrobial drug resistance in intra-abdominal infections: Current experience in a teaching 
hospital. Indian J PatholMicrobiol2013;56:388-92. 
5. Stephen P. Hawser, Robert E. Badal, Samuel K. Bouchillon, Daryl J. Hoban and the SMART 
India Working Group Antibiotic susceptibility of intra-abdominal infection isolates from Indian 
hospitals during 2008. J Med Microbiol September 2010 vol. 59 no. 9 1050-1054. 
6. Eshwarappa M, Dosegowda R, Aprameya I V, Khan M W, Kumar P S, Kempegowda P. 
Clinico-microbiological profile of urinary tract infection in South India. Indian J Nephrol2011; 
21:30-6. 
7. Sood S, Gupta R. Antibiotic resistance pattern of community acquired uropathogens at a tertiary 
care hospital in Jaipur, Rajasthan. Indian J Community Med 2012;37:39-44. 
8. Hina Gadani, Arun Vyas, Akhya Kumar Kar. A study of ventilator-associated pneumonia: 
Incidence, outcome, risk factors and measures to be taken for prevention. Indian J Anaesth. 
2010 Nov-Dec; 54(6): 535–540. 
9. Ram 
Gopalakrishnan, Dorairajan Sureshkumar. Changing 
Trends in Antimicrobial 
Susceptibility and Hospital Acquired Infections Over an 8 year Period in a Tertiary Care 
Hospital in Relation to Introduction of an Infection Control Programme. Supplement to JAPI 
December 2010 VOL. 58. 25-31. 
10. Chopdekar K, Chande C, Chavan S, Veer P, Wabale V, Vishwakarma K, Joshi A. Central 
venous catheter-related blood stream infection rate in critical care units in a tertiary care, 
teaching hospital in Mumbai. Indian J Med Microbiol 2011; 29:169-71. 
11. Gahlot R, Nigam C, Kumar V, Yadav G, Anupurba S, Gahlot R, Nigam C, Kumar V, Yadav G, 
Anupurba S. Catheter-related bloodstream infections. Int J CritIllnInj Sci 2014; 4:162-7. 
12. Green M. Introduction: Infections in solid organ transplantation. Amer J Transplant 2013; 13:3–
8. 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. Dr. Pallab Ray 
Professor, Dept. of Medical Microbiology, 
PGIMER, Chandigarh

<<<PAGE 147>>>
142 
 
CHAPTER: 12 
Management of Pelvic infections 
 
12.1 Introduction 
Common gynaecological conditions which need treatment with antibiotics are pelvic 
inflammatory disease, bacterial vaginosis, vaginal candidiasis and vaginal trichomoniasis. 
Serious conditions include surgical site infections (SSI), puerperal sepsis and septic 
abortion. Antibiotic prophylaxis in surgical procedures reduces colonization by 
microorganisms introduced at surgery to a level which the patient’s immune system can 
overcome. 
 
12.2 Case definition 
a. Surgical Site Infection (SSI): These are defined by the Centre for Disease Control, 
USA (CDC) and may be superficial, deep or involving organ/space. SSI section is 
given in detail in chapter 10. 
b. Puerperal sepsis: Defined as “Infection of the genital tract occurring between 
rupture of membranes or labour and the 42nd day postpartum with 2 or more of the 
following”: 
 Pelvic pain 
 Pyrexia i.e. oral temperature 38.5°C or higher on any occasion 
 Abnormal vaginal discharge, e.g. presence of pus or discharge with a foul odour 
 Delay in the rate of reduction of the size of the uterus (<2cm/day during the first 
8 days) 
 
c. Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID): Comprises inflammatory disorders of the 
upper genital tract, including endometritis, salpingitis, tubo-ovarian abscess, or 
pelvic peritonitis. The symptoms include fever, pelvic pain, dyspareunia and 
abnormal vaginal discharge. The diagnosis of PID would be likely in the presence 
of features listed below: 
1. Sexually active young women 
2. Symptoms of pelvic or lower abdominal pain 
3.Presence of cervical motion tenderness or uterine tenderness or adnexal 
tenderness on clinical examination 
4. No other cause identified for the above symptoms and signs

<<<PAGE 148>>>
143 
 
d. Vaginitis & cervicitis: It comprises a spectrum of inflammatory disorders of the 
lower female genital tract characterized by vaginal discharge, odour, pruritus, and 
dyspareunia. 
 
12.3 Common pathogens 
The common organisms causing sepsis in the puerperium are mostly from endogenous 
microbiota of vagina and includestreptococci (Group B), enterococci, lactobacilli, 
diphtheroids, Escherichia coli, genital mycoplasma, Bacteroides spp andotheranaerobes. 
Following caesarean section – Organisms to cover would include Staphylococci, 
Streptococci, Enterococci, Lactobacilli, Diptheroids, E. coli, anaerobic streptococci, 
Bacteroidesand Fusobacteriumspp. A meta-analysis showed that prophylaxis is definitely 
recommended and reduces fever, endometritis, SSI, UTI etc.The common organisms 
causing sepsis in gynaecologic surgery are polymicrobial and includeenterococci, 
aerobic gram-negative bacilli, gram-positive cocci, Bacteroides spp and other anaerobes. 
For the majority of SSI, the endogenous flora of the vagina or the skin is responsible. 
Aerobic gram-positive cocci, like staphylococci, are causative agents in the majority of 
the cases but faecal flora (Enterobacter spp and E. coli) may also contribute when the 
incision is near the perineum or groin. 
 
The multicenter, randomized, double-blind, active and placebo-controlled study 
compared single doses of ampicillin, cefazolin, and placebo administered to women 
undergoing elective total abdominal hysterectomy at two centres in Thailand. The study 
found a significantly lower rate of infection, including superficial and deep SSIs, urinary 
tract infections, vaginal cuff infection, and pneumonia, with cefazolin (10.3%) compared 
with placebo (26.9%) and ampicillin (22.6%). 
The staphylococci may be MSSA (methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus) or 
MRSA, the latter more likely when the patient is referred after treatment at some other 
healthcare facility. During procedures like hysterectomy, which involve opening of the 
vaginal cuff, the surgical site may be exposed to a variety of anaerobes and aerobes from 
the vaginal microflora. There is evidence that the cervical region and surrounding 
uppermost part of the vaginahavefewer anaerobes and aerobes of the proteobacteria class, 
which are responsible for the majority of infections. 
 Common pathogens causing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) are C. trachomatis, N. 
gonorrhoea, Bacteroides, peptostreptococci, mycoplasma, Gardnerella vaginalis, 
Haemophilus influenzae, enteric Gram-negative rods, Streptococcus agalactiae and 
anaerobes. 
 Common pathogens causing vaginitis are Candida species, Trichomonas vaginalis and 
organisms 
causing 
bacterial 
vaginosis 
like 
Gardnerella, 
peptostreptococci, 
Bacteroides, other anaerobes, ureaplasma and mycoplasma. 
 Common pathogens causing cervicitis are chlamydia and N. gonorrhoea.

<<<PAGE 149>>>
144 
 
Puerperal endometritis is polymicrobial, (aerobic–anaerobic). These organisms are part of 
the vaginal flora and are introduced into the upper genital tract coincident with vaginal 
examinations during labour and/or instrumentation during surgery 
 
12.4 Investigations 
Blood cultures and other samples such as mid-stream urine, vaginal swab, cervical swab, 
throat swab, placental swabs, sputum, cerebrospinal fluid, epidural site swab, caesarean 
section or episiotomy site wound swabs should be obtained prior to starting 
antibiotics.Antibiotics should be given as soon as possible. Results of laboratory tests 
should be checked and the microbiologist consulted to ensure optimum antimicrobial 
therapy. 
12.5 Antibiotic prophylaxis regimens 
12.5.1 Obstetrics 
a. Vaginal Delivery: Antibiotics are not routinely recommended. Women who do not 
know their Group B streptococcus (GBS) status are given antibiotics in situations 
mentioned in table II. 
 
 Antibiotic regimens: 
 
Ampicillin 2 gm IV initial dose followed by 1gm IV 4-6 hourly till delivery for GBS 
prophylaxis. If allergic, vancomycin 1 gm IV 12 hourly till delivery. 
 
Third/fourth-degree perineal tear: Single dose IV cefuroxime 1.5 gm plus 
metronidazole 500 mg or IV amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 1.2 gm or clindamycin 600 
mg IV if penicillin allergic). 
 
b. Preterm prelabour rupture of membranes: Ampicillin 2 gm followed by 1 gm IV 4-6 
hourly for 48 hours followed by oral amoxicillin for 5 days PLUS oral erythromycin 
stearate 250-500 mg 6th hourly for 7 days. 
c. Caesarean Delivery: Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for all caesarean sections 
● 
A single dose of first-generation cephalosporin, IV cefazolin, 2gm, within 60 minutes 
before incision. Minimum interval before incision should be 15 minutes, preferably 
30 minutes. 
● 
If allergic to cefazolin, give a single dose of IV clindamycin 600-900mg + 
gentamicin 80 mg. 
 
After a single dose, therapeutic drug level is maintained for 3-4 hours; repeat dose if the 
duration of surgery is >3 hours or blood loss is >1500 ml. Cefazolin prophylaxis is 
recommended even for those receiving ampicillin during labour for GBS prophylaxis. 
This is because ampicillin is less effective against MSSA, the chief cause of SSI, due to 
beta-lactamase production. If the patient is already receiving appropriate antibiotics (e.g.,

<<<PAGE 150>>>
145 
 
for chorioamnionitis), then cefazolin prophylaxis may be omitted. Tita et al showed the 
addition of 500 mg azithromycin to cefazolin for caesareans (in labour or with 
membranes ruptured) reduced endometritis & wound infection significantly (6.1% vs. 
12.0%, P<0.001), endometritis (3.8% vs. 6.1%, P=0.02) wound infection (2.4% vs. 6.6%, 
P<0.001). 
d. Rescue cervical encerclage: Ampicillin 2 g IV single dose to reduce the risk of 
infection due to exposed membranes in the vagina. 
12.5.2 Gynaecological surgery 
a. Hysterectomy and surgeries for pelvic organ prolapse and/or stress urinary 
incontinence: All women undergoing laparoscopic/ vaginal/abdominal hysterectomy 
(VH, AH), or surgery for stress urinary incontinence should receive prophylactic 
antibiotics. 
● A single dose of cefazolin 2 g IV. The dose is 3 gm if weight is >100 kg. The 
alternative is a second-generation cephalosporin like cefuroxime. 
● If allergic to cephalosporins, use clindamycin 600 mg IV. 
● Administer 15 to 60 minutes prior to incision. An additional dose is given 3 hours after 
the initial dose if a surgical procedure is lengthy (e.g.>3 hours), or blood loss is >1500 
mL. 
● Give oral metrogyl 500mg BD x 7 days, starting at least 4 days before surgery, to 
prevent post-operative vaginal cuff infection if there is evidence of bacterial vaginosis. 
 
 
b. Other gynaecological procedures 
 Laparoscopy (uterus and/or vagina not entered) / hysteroscopy / ectopic pregnancy: 
Single dose of cefazolin 1gm IV (if allergic, use clindamycin 600 mg). The alternative 
is a second-generation cephalosporin like cefuroxime. Give oral doxycycline 100 mg 
twice daily for 5 days post-operatively if there is a history of PID or if fallopian tubes 
are dilated at the procedure. 
 Abortions: Women undergoing an induced abortion (surgical or medical) must receive 
antibiotics effective against Chlamydia trachomatis and anaerobes. There is no need of 
antibiotics following curettage for a missed or incomplete abortion. Regimens: 
doxycycline 100 mg oral twice daily for 7 days, starting on the day of abortion, plus 
metronidazole 800 mg oral at time of abortion OR azithromycin 1 g oral plus 
metronidazole 800 mg oral at time of the abortion. 
 HSG: Oral doxycycline 100 mg prior to the procedure, to be continued twice daily for 
5 days if there is a history of PID or fallopian tubes are found dilated at the procedure. 
 
c. Gynaecological cancer surgery: Although current guidelines do not recommend any 
different antibiotics for gynaecological cancer surgery, the wound infection rate may be

<<<PAGE 151>>>
146 
 
higher, especially if bowel surgery is performed during surgery for ovarian cancer. 
Here, the infection may be reduced by instituting all measures for surgical prophylaxis, 
pre-operative use of oral antibiotics and mechanical bowel preparation, and newer 
measures being added like a change of gloves and instrument tray prior to skin closure. 
The SSI rate in vulvectomy for carcinoma vulva is high (58% among 149 patients by 
Leminen et al) and use of second generation cephalosporins with nitroimidazoles is 
suggested. 
12.5.3 Emergency area (septic cases) 
a. Puerperal sepsis / septic induced abortion / chorioamnionitis: Inj. Piperacillin-
tazobactam 4.5 gm IV 6 hourly x 7-14 days.If patients have received antibiotics elsewhere 
OR have septic shock OR are intubated, consider optimum and appropriate antibiotics like 
imipenem and vancomycin, or teicoplanin to cover MRSA. It is important to consider and 
cover C. sordelli and C. perfringens.Amikacin may be included among the initial 
antibiotics to treat puerperal sepsis in India. 
Table 12.1: Summarizing use of antimicrobial agents (AMA) in Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology 
S. 
no. 
Clinical condition / 
procedure 
Common 
pathogens 
Preferred 
AMA 
Alternate 
AMA 
Comments 
1. 
Vaginal delivery: 
For GBS (Group B 
Streptococcus) 
prophylaxis in women 
who do not know their 
GBS status in the 
following situations: 
 Preterm labour (< 37 
wks) 
 Prolonged rupture of 
membranes 
(>18 
hrs) 
 Fever during labour 
or chorioamnionitis 
 History 
of 
the 
previous baby with 
GBS infection 
 Bladder or kidney 
infection due to GBS 
Group 
B 
Streptococci 
Ampicillin 
 
Cefazolin ; 
If 
allergic, 
vancomycin 
Not 
recommended 
routinely for normal 
vaginal delivery 
 
Delivery 
is 
considered akin to 
drainage 
of 
an 
abscess as the fetus 
and 
placenta 
is 
removed which are 
the nidus of infection 
 
 
2. 
3rd 
or 
4th 
degree 
Perineal tear 
Gram positive
S. 
aureus, 
Gram 
negative 
Enterobacteria
ceae 
Cefoxitin or 
cefotetan 
Cefazolin plus 
metronidazole 
 
OR 
cefuroxime 
plus 
Prophylaxis 
is 
considered to prevent 
adverse 
outcomes 
arising 
from 
infection e.g. fistulas

<<<PAGE 152>>>
147 
 
Anaerobes 
metronidazole 
 
OR 
amoxicillin-
clavulanic acid 
 
if 
allergic, 
clindamycin 
3. 
Preterm 
pre-labour 
rupture of membranes 
Gram positive 
GBS 
Gram 
negative: 
Enteric gram-
negative 
bacilli, 
Ureaplasma, 
mycoplasma 
Anaerobes 
(including G. 
vaginalis) 
Ampicillin 
followed by 
oral 
amoxycillin 
 
PLUS 
oral 
erythromycin 
 If 
erythromycin 
333 mg is not 
available, use 
erythromycin 
stearate 
 
4. 
Caesarean delivery 
Gram 
positiveaerob
es:GBS, 
Staphylococci, 
Enterococci 
 
 
Cefazolin + 
azithromycin 
 
 
If 
allergic, 
clindamycin + 
gentamicin 
 
5. 
Rescue 
cervical 
encerclage 
Vaginal flora 
Inj ampicillin 
To prevent ascending 
infection 
from 
vaginal 
flora 
to 
exposed membranes 
6. 
Puerperal 
sepsis 
/ 
Septic 
abortion 
/ 
chorioamnionitis 
 
Gram 
positive: 
Streptococci 
(A, 
B, 
D), 
S.aureus 
Gram 
negative: 
E.coli, 
Enterobacteria
ceae including 
Klebsiella, 
Enterobacter, 
Citrobacter, 
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, 
Proteus 
mirabilis, 
Gardnerella 
vaginalis, 
 Inj. 
piperacillin-
tazobactam 
 
Clindamycin + 
gentamicin 
If the patient is 
in 
septic 
shock, 
consider 
imipenem/mer
openem 
with 
or 
without 
amikacin plus 
vancomycin, 
or 
to 
cover 
MRSA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Usually 
polymicrobial

<<<PAGE 153>>>
148 
 
Bacteroides 
Clostridium 
perfringens, 
Anaerobes
7. 
Hysterectomy 
(AH, 
VH, laparoscopic) and 
surgeries 
for 
pelvic 
organ prolapse and/or 
stress 
urinary 
incontinence 
Polymicrobial: 
Gram-
positive: 
Staphylococci, 
Gram 
Negative: 
Enterococci, 
aerobic gram-
negative, 
Anaerobes 
Bacteroides 
spp, 
Cefazolin 
 
Cefuroxime 
+/- 
metronidazole 
 
OR 
 
 
If allergic to 
cephalosporin, 
use 
clindamycin + 
gentamycin 
In AH & LH, the 
vagina is opened at 
end of procedure & 
exposure to vaginal 
flora is brief. 
 
In 
VH, 
there 
is 
greatercolonisation 
of the surgical site. 
In AH for cancer 
with 
resection 
of 
upper vagina, there 
may be colonization 
with anaerobes. In 
such 
cases, 
metronidazole 
500 
mg IV may be added. 
If BV is suspected, 
oral 
metronidazole 
500mg BD for 7 days 
is given, beginning at 
least 4 days pre-op 
8. 
Laparoscopy 
(uterus 
and/or 
vagina 
not 
entered) 
/ 
Hysteroscopy 
/ 
Ectopic pregnancy 
Skin 
commensals: 
S. aureus 
Cefazolin 
 Cefuroxime 
If allergic, use 
clindamycin 
 
9. 
Abortions 
(medical 
and surgical) 
Chlamydia, 
Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae 
Azithromyci
n 
plus 
metronidazol
e 
Doxycycline 
plus 
metronidazole 
No prophylaxis for 
missed / incomplete 
abortion 
10. 
HSG 
 
Chlamydia, 
Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae 
Doxycycline 
 
Doxycycline 
continued twice daily 
for 5 days if there is 
a history of PID or 
fallopian tubes are 
dilated 
at 
the 
procedure 
11. 
Pelvic 
Inflammatory 
disease 
(mild to moderate) 
N. 
gonorrhoeae, 
C. trachomatis 
and anaerobes. 
 
 E. 
coli, 
Bacteroides 
GBS, GAS, S. 
NACO 
based: 
Tab. 
Cefixime 
PLUS 
Tab. 
Metronidazol
e 
CDC based: 
Levofloxacin 
with 
Metronidazole 
 
OR 
 
Ceftriaxone

<<<PAGE 154>>>
149 
 
aureus 
PLUS 
Cap. 
Doxycycline 
plus 
Doxycycline 
with 
or 
without 
Metronidazole 
12. 
Pelvic 
Inflammatory 
disease 
(severe) 
eg 
turbo-
ovarian abscess, pelvic 
abscess 
 
Cefotetan 
 PLUS 
doxycycline 
 
Cefoxitin 
PLUS 
Doxycycline 
OR 
Clindamycin 
PLUS 
gentamicin 
loading 
dose 
Or 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam/im
ipenem 
(for 
severely 
ill 
patients) 
An attempt should be 
made 
to 
obtain 
cultures 
and 
de-
escalate 
based 
on 
that. 
Duration 
is 
two 
weeks but can be 
extended depending 
upon 
the 
clinical 
situation. Antibiotics 
may be altered after 
obtaining 
culture 
reports 
of 
pus/or 
blood 
13. 
Vaginal candidiasis 
C. albicans, 
C. glabrata, 
C. tropicalis 
Tab 
Fluconazole 
OR 
local 
Clotrimazole 
Miconazole, 
nystatin 
vaginal 
tablets/creams 
 
 
 
 
Treat for 7 days in 
pregnancy, diabetes 
 
Recurrent infections: 
150 mg Fluconazole 
on day 1,4,7 then 
weekly for 6 months 
14. 
Vaginal trichomoniasis
T. vaginalis 
Tab.Secnidaz
ole OR Tab. 
Tinidazole 
OR 
 
Tab. 
Metronidazol
e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alcohol 
avoided 
during treatment and 
24 
hours 
after 
metronidazole or 72 
hours 
after 
completion 
of 
tinidazole to reduce 
the possibility of a 
disulfiram-like 
reaction. 
Partner 
treatment essential 
15. 
Bacterial vaginosis 
Overgrowth of 
anaerobes 
(Gardnerella 
vaginalis) 
Metronidazol
e 
OR 
Metronidazol
e gel 
OR 
clindamycin 
Cream 
Secnidazole 
OR Tinidazole 
 
OR 
Tinidazole OR 
clindamycin 
OR 
clindamycin 
ovules 
Refrain from sexual 
activity 
or 
use 
condoms during the 
treatment. 
 
Clindamycin 
cream 
is 
oil-based 
and 
might weaken latex 
condoms

<<<PAGE 155>>>
150 
 
Table 12.2: Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
 
Antibiotics 
Doses, duration and route of administration 
Vaginal delivery 
Ampicillin 
2 gm IV followed by 1g IV 4-6 hourly till delivery 
Cefazolin 
2 g IV followed by 1 g 8 hourly till delivery 
Vancomycin 
1 gm IV 12 hourly till delivery 
3rd or 4th degree Perineal tear 
Cefoxitin or Cefotetan
Single dose 1gm IV 
Cefazolin + 
Metronidazole 
Single dose Cefa (1 g IV) + Met (500 mg IV) 
Cefuroxime + 
Metronidazole 
single dose Cefu (1.5 g IV) + Met (500 mg IV) 
Amoxicillin-
Clavulanic acid 
1.2 gm IVsingle dose 
Clindamycin 
600-900 mg IV single dose 
Preterm pre-labour rupture of membranes 
Ampicillin-
Amoxycillin + 
Erythromycin 
Amp (2 g IV followed by 1 gm 4-6 hourly for 48 hours) – oral 
Amoxy (500mg 8 hourly for 5 days) + Eryth (333 mg 8 
hourly for 7 days) 
Erythromycin 
Stearate 
250 mg 6 hourly for 7 days 
Caesarean delivery 
Cefazolin + 
Azithromycin 
Single dose Cef (2gm IV) +Azi ( 500 mg) The dose is 3gm if 
the patient is >100kg 
Clindamycin + 
Gentamicin 
single dose clinda (600-900mg IV)+ Genta (1.5mg/kg IV) 
Rescue cervical encerclage 
Ampicillin 
Inj. 2gms single dose 
Puerperal sepsis / Septic abortion / chorioamnionitis 
Piperacillin-
Tazobactam 
Inj. 4.5 gm IV 6 hourly X 7-14 days 
Clindamycin + 
Gentamicin 
Clinda (600-900mg IV 8 hourly) + Genta (60mg IV 8 hourly 
(if penicillin allergic) 
Hysterectomy and surgeries 
Cefazolin 
2 gm IV single dose (The dose is 3gm if the patient is >100kg)
Cefuroxime +/- 
Metronidazole 
Cef (1.5 g IV single dose) +/- met (500 mg) 
Clindamycin + 
Gentamicin 
Clinda (600 -900 mg IV) + 1.5mg/kg IV 
Laparoscopy/ Hysteroscopy / Ectopic pregnancy 
Cefazolin 
2gm IV single dose. 
Cefuroxime 
1.5 g IV sinlge dose 
Clindamycin 
600 mg IV

<<<PAGE 156>>>
151 
 
Abortions 
Azithromycin 
+ 
Metronidazole 
Azi (1 g orally) + Met (800 mg orally at the time of abortion) 
Doxycycline + 
Metronidazole 
Doxy (100 mg orally twice daily for 7 days, starting on the 
day of abortion) +Metro (800 mg orally at the time of 
abortion) 
HSG 
Doxycycline 
100 mg orally before the procedure 
Pelvic Inflammatory disease (mild to moderate) 
Cefixime + 
Metronidazole + 
Doxycycline 
 Cef (400 mg orally STAT) + Metro (400 mg tds X 14D) + 
Doxy (100 mg bd X 14 D) 
Levofloxacin with 
Metronidazole 
Levo (500 mg OD X 14 days) with Metro (400 mg tds X 14 
days) 
Ceftriaxone 
+ 
Doxycycline 
with 
/without 
Metronidazole 
Ceftr (250 mg IM single dose) +Doxy (orally 100 mg BD X 
14 days) with Metro (500 mg BD X 14 days) 
Pelvic Inflammatory disease (severe) 
Cefotetan + 
Doxycycline 
Cefot (2 g IV BD) + Doxy (100 mg orally or IV BD) 
Cefoxitin 
+Doxycycline 
Cefotx (2 g IV every 6 hours) + Doxy (100 mg orally or IV 
every 12 hours) 
Clindamycin + 
Gentamicin loading 
dose 
Clinda (900 mg IV every 8 hours) + Genta IV or IM (2 
mg/kg), followed by amaintenance dose (1.5 mg/kg) every 8 
hours. Single daily dosing (3–5 mg/kg) can be substituted 
Vaginal candidiasis 
Fluconazole 
150 mg orally single dose 
Clotrimazole 
500 mg vaginal tablet once only 
Secnidazole 
2 gm oral, single dose 
Tinidazole 
500 mg orally, twice daily for 5 days 
Metronidazole 
400 mg, twice daily for 7 days 
Bacterial vaginosis
Metronidazole 
400 mg BD, orally X 7 days 
Metronidazole gel 
0.75%, one applicator (5 g) intravaginal x 5 days 
Clindamycin Cream 
2%, one applicator (5 g) intravaginal x 7 days 
Secnidazole 
2 g orally OD X one day 
Tinidazole 
 2 g orally OD X 2 days/ 1 g orally OD X 5 days 
Clindamycin 
orally 300 mg BD X 7 days 
Clindamycin ovules 
100 mg intravaginally OD HS for 3 days*

<<<PAGE 157>>>
152 
 
References 
1. 
Use of Prophylactic Antibiotics in Labor and Delivery (2011). ACOG Committee Opinion. 
Obstetrics & Gynecology 117: 1472-1483. 
2. 
Costantine MM, Rahman M, Ghulmiyah L, et al (2008). Timing of perioperative antibiotics 
for cesarean delivery: a meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol.199:301.e1-301.e6 
3. 
Antibiotic Prophylaxis in Obstetric Procedures SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE 
No. 247, JOGC September 2010. 
4. 
Prophylactic antibiotics in Obstetrics and Gynaecology RANZCOG College Statement: C-
Gen 17 March 13. 1-3 
5. 
Smaill F, Hofmeyr GJ (2002). Antibiotic prophylaxis for cesarean section. Cochrane 
Database 
of 
Systematic 
Reviews, 
Issue 
3. 
Art. 
No.: 
CD000933. 
DOI: 
10.1002/14651858.CD000933. 
6. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Prevention of Perinatal Group B Streptococcal 
Disease]. MMWR 2010; 59 (No. RR-10) 
7. 
Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P,Thinkhamrop J, Thinkhamrop B (2010). Antibiotic prophylaxis 
for third and fourth degree perineal tear during vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
(11): CD005125. 
8. 
Clifford V, Daley A (2012). Antibiotic prophylaxis in obstetric and gynaecological 
procedures: A review. Aust NZ J Obstet Gynaecol 52: 412–419. 
9. 
Antibiotic Prophylaxis in Gynaecologic Procedures SOGC CLINICAL PRACTICE 
GUIDELINE No. 275, JOGC April 2012. 
10. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG). The care of women requesting 
induced abortion [Evidence-based clinical guideline no. 7]. RCOG; 2011. 
11. Maharaj D (2007). Puerperal pyrexia: a review. Part I. Obstet Gynecol Surv 62:393–399 
12. National Guidelines on Prevention, Management and Control of Reproductive Tract 
Infections and Sexually Transmitted Infections. NACO July 2014:1-148. 
13. CDC. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines. MMWR Recomm Rep 2015; 64 
(No. 3):1-138. 
14. ACOG practice bulletin No. 104: antibiotic prophylaxis for gynecologic procedures. Obstet 
Gynecol 2009;113 (5):1180-9. 
15. Kim et al (2009) Heterogeneity of Vaginal Microbial Communities within Individuals. JCM 
47:1181-89. 
16. Mangram AJ, et al (1999( "Guideline for prevention of surgical site infection, 1999". 
Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infection Control Hospital 
Epidemiology, 20(4): 250-78; quiz 279-80. 
17. Hofmeyr GJ, Smaill F (2002). Antibiotic prophylaxis for cesarean section. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 3: CD000933 
18. Chongsomchai C, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J et al (2002). Placebo-controlled, double-
blind, randomized study of prophylactic antibiotics in elective abdominal hysterectomy. J 
Hosp Infect 52:302–306. 
19. Tita ATN, Szychowski JM, Boggess K, et al (2016) Adjunctive azithromycin prophylaxis for 
cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 375:1231-1241

<<<PAGE 158>>>
153 
 
20. Vanukuru J, Bagga R, Muthyala T, Gautam V, Sethi s, Jain V, Sikka P (2018). A clinical & 
microbiological study of puerperal sepsis in India. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 7:1-
7.doi:10.1080/14767058.2017.1421933. 
21. Lippitt MH, Fairbairn MG, Matsuno R, et al (2017). Outcomes Associated With a Five-Point 
Surgical Site Infection Prevention Bundle in Women Undergoing Surgery for Ovarian 
Cancer. Obstet Gynecol 130:756–64 
22. Johnson MP, Kim SJ, BA, Langstraat CL, et al (2016). Using Bundled Interventions to 
Reduce Surgical Site Infection After Major Gynecologic Cancer Surgery.Obstet Gynecol 
127:1135–44 
23. Leminen A, Forss M, Paavonen J (2000). Wound complications in patients with carcinoma 
of the vulva: Comparison between radical and modified vulvectomies. European Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 93: 193 –7. 
 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. Dr Rashmi Bagga 
 Professor, Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 
PGIMER, Chandigarh 
 
2. Dr Pallab Ray 
Professor, Dept. of Medical Microbiology, 
PGIMER, Chandigarh. 
 
3. Dr Parul Arora 
 Senior Resident (Ex) Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 
PGIMER, Chandigarh 
 
4. Dr Rimpi Singla 
 Assistant Professor, Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 
PGIMER, Chandigarh

<<<PAGE 159>>>
154 
 
CHAPTER: 13 
Management of Infective Endocarditis 
 
 
13.1 Infective Endocarditis 
13.1 Introduction: 
Infective endocarditis (IE) is one of the most challenging syndromes in the landscape of 
infectious diseases. It is infection of the endothelial surfaces of the heart or iatrogenic foreign 
bodies like prosthetic valves and other intracardiac devices. 
Management of IE with surgery and appropriate antibiotics has implications on patient outcome, 
healthcare costs, length of hospital stay, and antimicrobial resistance. Appropriate use of 
antibiotics in IE can be a “low-hanging fruit” from antimicrobial stewardship perspective as well. 
 
13.2 Epidemiology: 
Recently there have been substantial changes in epidemiology of IE. In India, IE is increasingly 
becoming common in older age group (> 40 years) with no previously known valve disease as 
compared to younger patients (with mean age-25 years) with underlying valvular heart disease. 
This is comparable to the data reported by developed countries. In children, the common risk 
factors include ventricular septal defect (VSD) and rheumatic heart disease (RHD). 
. 
Microbiological profile of IE is illustrated in is Table 13.1 
Table 13.1: Microbiology profile of Infective endocarditis 
Study 
Culture Positive 
Cases (%) 
Etiologies 
Soman et al, 20181 
 
VGS (31.8%), Enterococci 
(20.4%), Aspergillus (2.27%), 
NTM (15.9%), MSSA (6.8%), 
Candida (4.54%) 
Gupta et al, 20152 
69% (22/32) 
VGS (15.6%), Enterococci 
(15.6%), MSSA (9.3%), MRSA 
(6.25%), Pseudomonas (3.1%), 
Klebsiella Pneumoniae (3.1%), 
Scaedosporium (3.1%), Candida 
(6.25%), Brucella (3.1%) 
Soman et al, 20134 
 
74.2 % (26/35) 
VGS (34.5%), Enterococci (23%), 
Aspergillus (3.8%), NTM (19.2%), 
MSSA (3.8%), Candida (3.8%) 
Subhramanian et al, 2010 22.3% (27/121) 
VGS - (55.5%), Staphylococcus 
species - 4 (14.8%) cases.

<<<PAGE 160>>>
155 
 
Streptococci (VGS) and enterococci are the most common organisms isolated. Enterococcal IE 
appears to be becoming more common especially in elderly patients, patients with chronic liver 
disease or in patients with urinary tract infection. Overall, prevalence of MRSA is less than 10% 
in the various studies reported. 
 
13.3 Diagnosis 
Clinical suspicion, blood culture and echocardiography remain the cornerstone of diagnosis of 
IE. Modified Duke’s Criteria which includes major and minor criteria is useful in the diagnosis 
of IE (Table 13.2). Presence of 2 major criteria or 1 major and 3 minor criteria or 5 minor criteria 
is suggestive of definite IE while presence of 1 major and 1 minor or 3 minor criteria is 
suggestive of possible IE. Rejected IE is firm alternative diagnosis explaining evidence of IE; 
or resolution of IE syndrome with antibiotic therapy for ≤4 days; or no pathological evidence of 
IE at surgery or autopsy with antibiotic therapy for ≤4 days; or does not meet criteria for possible 
IE as above. 
 
Table 13.2: Modified Duke’s Criteria for the Diagnosis of IE9 
 
Criteria 
Features 
Major 
criteria 
 
1. Blood culture positive for IE 
Typical microorganisms consistent with IE from 2 separate blood cultures: 
Viridans streptococci, Streptococcus bovis, HACEK group, Staphylococcus 
aureus; or community-acquired enterococci in the absence of a primary 
focus, or microorganisms consistent with IE from persistently positive blood 
cultures defined as follows: at least 2 positive cultures of blood samples 
drawn >12 h apart or all 3 or a majority of ≥4 separate cultures of blood 
(with first and last sample drawn at least 1 h apart) 
Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii or anti–phase 1 IgG 
antibody titer ≥1:800 
2. Evidence of endocardial involvement 
Echocardiogram positive for IE (TEE recommended for patients with 
prosthetic valves, rated at least possible IE by clinical criteria, or 
complicated IE [paravalvular abscess]; TTE as first test in other 
patients) defined as follows: oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or 
supporting structures, in the path of regurgitant jets, or on implanted 
material in the absence of an alternative anatomic explanation; abscess; or 
new partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve or new valvular regurgitation 
(worsening or changing or pre-existing murmur not sufficient) 
 
Minor 
criteria 
 
1. Predisposition, predisposing heart condition, or IDU 
2. Fever, temperature >38°C 
3. Vascular phenomena, major arterial emboli, septic pulmonary 
infarcts, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemorrhage, conjunctival 
hemorrhages, and Janeway lesions 
4. Immunological phenomena glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth 
spots, and rheumatoid factor 
5. Microbiological evidence: positive blood culture but does not meet a

<<<PAGE 161>>>
156 
 
major criterion as noted above (excludes single positive cultures for 
coagulase negative staphylococci and organisms that do not cause 
endocarditis) or serological evidence of active infection with 
organism consistent with IE 
 
HACEK indicates Haemophilus species, Aggregatibacter species, cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, 
and Kingella species; IDU, injection drug use; IE, infective endocarditis; IgG, immunoglobulin G; TEE 
transesophageal echocardiography; and TTE, transthoracic echocardiography 
 
13.4 St Thomas modification of Dukes criteria: 
Inclusion of elevated ESR or CRP, the presence of newly diagnosed clubbing, splenomegaly and 
microscopic hematuria as minor criteria (St. Thomas modifications) have been shown to increase 
the sensitivity by 10%, without significant loss of specificity of the western setting. 
 
13.5 Antimicrobial therapy for IE 
13.5.1 Empirical therapy 
Treatment of IE should be started promptly only in patients who are in frank sepsis or who are 
hemodynamically unstable. As blood culture data is crucial in antibiotic selection, in stable 
patients with recent antibiotic exposure it is reasonable to stop all antibiotics and draw blood 
cultures after an antibiotic free interval. Three sets of blood cultures should be drawn at 30 
minutes interval before the initiation of antibiotics. Empirical treatment for IE is described in 
Table 13.3. 
 
Table 13.3: Empirical antibiotic therapy for IE (pending blood culture results) 
Native Valve IE 
Etiologies (usual) 
Suggested Regimens 
(Primary) 
Adjunct Diagnostic or 
Therapeutic Measures 
or comments 
 
Empirical Treatment- 
awaiting cultures 
(No h/o skin/soft tissue 
infection or abscesses, 
no h/o IV drug abuse, 
no h/o CVC line or 
recent 
cardiac/prosthetic valve 
replacement) 
 
 
 
VGS, Enterococci, NVS, 
Streptococcus 
gallolyticus, 
 
Ampicillin-sulbactam 3g 
q6h 
(Ampicillin- 150mg/kg/day 
or Sulbactam 50 
mg/kg/day ) in 4 divided 
doses 
 
or 
 
Ampicillin 2 g IV in q4h 
Or 200 mg/kg/day in six 
divided doses 
plus 
Ceftriaxone 2 g IV q24h 
Paed Dose: 50-100 (60 
mg/kg/day) in two divided 
doses 
 
Plus 
Gentamicin 1 mg/kg q8h 
 
Gentamicin used for 
synergy, peak levels 
need not exceed 4 
mcg/ml. 
 
Advantage of 
Ampicillin-
sulbactam (AS) 
over 
CP/Ampicillin: 
AS Covers β-
lactamase 
producing 
Enterococci & 
HACEK Group of 
organisms 
 
Combination 
of ceftriaxone 
with Gentamicin 
does not cover 
Enterococcus, 
Nutritionally 
variant 
Streptococci

<<<PAGE 162>>>
157 
 
(Abiotrophica & 
Granulicatella) 
 
Native Valve IE 
(Risk factors for S. 
aureus) 
 
MSSA, CA-MRSA, HA-
MRSA*** 
Vancomycin 
25 mg/kg loading dose 
followed by 30per/kg per 
24 h IV in 2-3 equally 
divided doses 
 
Alternative Therapy: 
Daptomycin 6 mg/kg q24h 
(for Right-sided IE) 
 
Or 8-10 mg/kg q24h (For 
left- sided IE) 
 
For Possible MSSA: 
Flucloxacillin or Cefazolin 
Vancomycin trough 
levels -1 hour before 
the 4rth dose of 
vancomycin 
 
Recommended 
Vancomycin. trough 
levels in serious 
MRSA infections- 15-
20 μg/ml. 
 
Nephrotoxicity (0-
12%) which is 
associated with 
vancomycin trough 
levels greater than or 
equal to 15 μg/mL, in 
those receiving high 
dose vancomycin 
( greater or equal to 4 
g/day), concomitant 
use of nephrotoxic 
agents, and duration 
of vancomycin therapy 
 
PVE pending blood 
cultures or with 
negative blood cultures 
 
 
 
 
Ceftriaxone 2 g IV q24h 
Paed Dose: 50-100 (60 
mg/kg/day) in two divided 
doses 
AND 
Vancomycin (25 mg/kg 
loading dose followed by 
30-60 mg/kg per 24 h IV) 
AND 
Gentamicin 1mg/kg q12h 
 AND 
Rifampicin 300-600 mg 
q12H po/IV 
 
 
Use lower dose of 
rifampicin in severe 
renal impairment. 
 *NVS – Nutrionally variant streptococci 
 **CP- crystalline penicillin 
 
***MSSA- methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, CA-MRSA- community- acquired methicillin 
resistant Staphylococcus aurueus, HA-MRSA- hospital acquired methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus

<<<PAGE 163>>>
158 
 
13.6 Definitive antimicrobial treatment for IE9-14 
 
IE is most commonly caused by viridans group of streptococci (VGS) in the indian subcontinent. 
The taxonomy of VGS is evolving. The species that most commonly cause IE are S. sanguis, S. 
oralis (mitis), S. salivarius, S. mutans, and Gemella morbillorum (formerly called S. 
morbillorum). Members of the S. anginosus group (S. intermedius, anginosus, and constellatus) 
also have been referred to as the S milleri group, and this has caused some confusion. In contrast 
to other α-hemolytic streptococcal species, the S. anginosus group tends to form abscesses and to 
cause hematogenously disseminated infection (eg, myocardial and visceral abscesses, septic 
arthritis, and vertebral osteomyelitis). The recommendations are intended to assist clinicians in 
selecting appropriate antimicrobial therapy for patients with IE caused by VGS and S. 
gallolyticus (bovis, a nonenterococcal penicillin-susceptible group D Streptococcus) (Table 4). S. 
gallolyticus (bovis) expresses the group D antigen, but it can be distinguished from group D 
Enterococcus by appropriate biochemical tests. Patients with either S gallolyticus (bovis) 
bacteremia or IE should undergo a colonoscopy to determine whether malignancy or other 
mucosal lesions are present. 
 
Table 13.4: Antibiotic therapy for native valve IE due to VGS and group D streptococci, 
Streptococcus gallolyticus (Formerly Known as Streptococcus bovis), Abiotrophia defectiva, and 
Granulicatella Species 
 
Etiologies (usual) 
Suggested 
Regimens 
(Primary) 
Adjunct Diagnostic 
or Therapeutic 
Measures or 
comments 
Duration of antibiotic therapy 
Highly Penicillin-
Susceptible VGS 
and S gallolyticus 
(bovis) (MIC ≤0.12 
μg/mL) 
Aqueous crystalline 
penicillin G (CP) 
sodium 
20 -40 lac 
Units/kg/day IV 4 
hrly 
 
Or 12–18 million 
U/24 h IV in 4-6 
divided doses or 
continuously if 
possible 
 
Ampicillin 200 
mg/kg/day in six 
divided doses 
(Max dose - 2 g IV in 
q4h 
Or 
Ceftriaxone 50-100 
(60 mg/kg/day) in 
two divided doses 
(Max dose- 2 g IV 
q24h) 
 
For penicillin 
Allergy- 
Vancomycin is an 
alternative 
If only β-lactam is used – then, 4 
weeks 
 
But if the combination of β-lactam with 
Gentamicin (3mg/kg/day) is used – then, 2 
weeks is sufficient except in with known 
cardiac or extracardiac abscess or for those 
with creatinine clearance of <20 mL/min, 
impaired eighth 
cranial nerve function, or Abiotrophia, 
Granulicatella, 
or Gemella spp infection. 
Relatively resistant 
VGS 
(MIC >0.12 -0.5 
μg/mL) 
Aqueous crystalline 
penicillin G (CP) 
sodium 
Plus 
Gentamicin 
 
Ampicillin 
Or ceftriaxone 
Plus 
Gentamicin 
 
For penicillin 
β-lactam for 4 weeks and 
Gentamicin for 2 weeks

<<<PAGE 164>>>
159 
 
 
 
Staphylococcus aureus 
Table 13.5: Antibiotic therapy for due to Staphylococcus aureus * 
 
Etiologies (usual) 
Suggested Regimens 
(Primary) 
Adjunct Diagnostic or Therapeutic Measures or comments 
Native valve MSSA 
IE 
 
Cloxacillin 12gm/day 
in three divided 
doses for 6 weeks 
Flucloxacillin (200 -300 mg/kg/day in 4-6 equally 
divided doses)or 
Cefazolin Paediatric dose is 30-100 (60 mg/kg/day) 
in three divided doses for 6 weeks
Prosthetic 
valve 
MSSA IE 
 
Cloxacillin 
12gm/day in three 
divided doses, 
With 
Rifampicin 
max dose 900 mg 
for 6 weeks with 
Gentamicin 1mg/kg 
TDS for 2 weeks 
 
Flucloxacillin (200 -300 mg/kg/day in 4-6 equally 
divided doses) with 
Rifampicin Paediatric 15 mg/kg/day in three 
divided doses, max dose 900 mg for 6 weeks 
with 
Gentamicin 1mg/kg TDS for 2 weeks 
 
Native valve MRSA 
IE 
 
Vancomycin for 6 
weeks 
Daptomycin * 
 for 6 weeks 
Prosthetic 
valve 
MRSA IE- 
 
Vancomycin with 
Rifampicin 
 
in 
three divided doses, 
max dose 900 mg 
for 6 weeks with 
gentamicin 1mg/kg 
TDS for 2 weeks 
 
Daptomycin 
 for 6 weeks 
with rifampicin Paediatric 15 mg/kg/day in three 
divided doses, max dose 900 mg for 6 weeks 
with 
gentamicin 1mg/kg TDS for 2 weeks 
 
*Vancomycin Doses mentioned in Table 13.3 
** Daptomycin dose for right sided IE is 6 mg/kg/dose and for left-sided IE or complicated IE is 8-10 mg/kg/dose 
allergy- 
Vancomycin is an 
alternative 
VGS 
isolates with a 
penicillin MIC ≥0.5 
μg/mL 
& Abiotrophia and 
Granulicatella spp. 
(nutritionally variant 
streptococci) 
Aqueous crystalline 
penicillin G (CP) 
sodium 
Plus 
Gentamicin 
 
Ampicillin 
Or ceftriaxone 
Plus 
Gentamicin 
 
 
For penicillin 
allergy- 
Vancomycin is an 
alternative 
β-lactam and Gentamicin for 6 weeks

<<<PAGE 165>>>
160 
 
13.7 IE Caused by Coagulase-Negative Staphylococci 
 Coagulase-Negative Staphylococci (CoNS) in the presence of prosthetic valves or other 
prosthetic material can cause infective endocarditis. It can be the etiological agent for IE even in 
native valve if it’s isolated in multiple blood cultures like in patients on hemodialysis (HD) with 
an HD catheter or central venous catheter (CVC). CoNS that cause PVE usually are methicillin 
resistant, particularly when IE develops within 1 year after surgery. Treatment recommendations 
for IE caused by MR CoNS is illustrated in Table 13.6. 
 
Table 13.6: IE caused by Coagulase-Negative Staphylococci 
Etiologies (usual) 
Suggested Regimens (Primary) 
Native valve MR CoNS IE 
 
Vancomycin (30mg/kg/day in two divided doses) for 6 weeks 
Prosthetic 
valve 
MR 
CoNS IE- 
 
Vancomycin (30mg/kg/day in two divided doses) with 
rifampicin in three divided doses, max dose 900 mg for 6 
weeks with 
gentamicin 1mg/kg TDS for 2 weeks 
 
IE caused by Enterococci is increasingly becoming common. Antibiotic therapy is ummarized 
in Table 13.7. 
 
Table 13.7: Antibiotic therapy for due to Enterococcus spp 
 
Etiologies (usual) 
Suggested Regimens (Primary) 
Ampicillin sensitive (MIC ≤4 mg/L) and 
non-HLAR (MIC ≤128 mg/L) 
Ampicillin with 
Gentamicin for 4-6 weeks 
Ampicillin Resistant (β-lactamase 
producing) and non-HLAR 
Ampicillin-sulbactam with Gentamicin for 4-6 
weeks 
Ampicillin Resistant (β-lactamase 
producing) and HLAR/Risk of 
nephrotoxicity 
Ampicillin-sulbactam with Ceftriaxone for 6 
weeks14 
Ampicillin Resistant (aPBP) and 
HLAR/Risk of nephrotoxicity 
Vancomycin with gentamicin or daptomycin 
for 6 weeks 
 
Ampicillin 200 mg/kg/day in six divided doses (Max dose - 2 g IV in q4h). Native valve: 4-wk therapy 
recommended for patients with symptoms of illness <3 mo; 6-wk therapy recommended for native valve symptoms 
>3 mo and for patients with prosthetic valve or prosthetic material. Recommended for patients with creatinine 
clearance >50 mL/min. 
Ampicillin-sulbactam with Gentamicin : (Ampicillin- 150mg/kg/day and Sulbactam 50 mg/kg/day ) in 4 divided 
doses and Gentamicin 3 mg/kg per 24 h IV or IM in 3 equally divided doses 
Ampicillin-sulbactum with ceftriaxone: (Ampicillin- 150mg/kg/day with Sulbactam 50 mg/kg/day ) 
Vancomycin with gentamicin: Vancomycin 30 mg/kg per 24 h IV in 2 equally divided doses and Gentamicin 3 
mg/kg per 24 h IV or IM in 3 equally divided doses 
Daptomycin 8-10mg per kg per day 
 
Appropriate antibiotic therapy in IE can have immense impact from stewardship perspective. In a 
recent study2, following ID consultation, a change to optimal antibiotics was done in 25 of the 32 
patients. Of these, de-escalation from meropenem or β-lactam- β-lactamase inhibitor (βL-βLI) 
combination 
to 
ampicillin 
or 
ampicillin-sulbactam 
was 
done 
in 
12 
patients. 
Vancomycin/teicoplanin was discontinued in 8 patients. Linezolid discontinued in 3 patients.

<<<PAGE 166>>>
161 
 
Escalation to meropenem, vancomycin, gentamicin and rifamipicin combination was done in 2 
patients with early onset-PVE. No change of antibiotics was done in 4 patients with IE. 
Following the ID consultation with de-escalation of carbapenem and vancomycin/teicoplanin, 
the healthcare costs was reduced significantly. 
 
13.8 Treatment of fastidious & atypical pathogens 
 
13.8.1 HACEK endocarditis - Treatment should be with a β-lactamase-stable cephalosporins or 
amoxicillin if the isolate is susceptible. Gentamicin should only be added for the first 2 weeks of 
therapy. Ciprofloxacin can be considered an alternative agent. 
NVE should receive 4 weeks and PVE 6 weeks of treatment. 
 
13.8.2 Antibiotic prophylaxis prior to invasive procedures: 
 
Prophylaxis should be considered for patients at highest risk for IE: 
(1) Patients with any prosthetic valve, including a transcatheter valve, or those in whom any 
prosthetic material was used for cardiac valve repair. 
(2) Patients with a previous episode of IE. 
 
(3) Patients with congenital heart disease (CHD): 
(a) Any type of cyanotic CHD. 
(b)Any type of CHD repaired with a prosthetic material, whether placed surgically or by 
percutaneous techniques, up to 6 months after the procedure or lifelong if residual shunt or 
valvular regurgitation remains. 
Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended in other forms of valvular or CHD. 
Recommended prophylaxis for high-risk dental procedures in high-risk patients includes 
amoxicillin or ampicillin 50 mg/kg orally or i.v. or clindamycin 20 mg/kg orally 30-60 minutes 
before the procedure. 
 
Table 13.8: Indication for surgery in patient with associated condition9-13, 15 
 
Indication for surgery 
Timing 
Heart failure 
 
Aortic/mitral IE with severe regurgitation/valve obstruction causing 
pulmonary oedema or cardiogenic shock 
Emergency
Aortic/mitral IE with fistula into cardiac chamber or pericardium causing 
refractory pulmonary oedema or shock 
Emergency
Aortic/mitral IE with severe acute regurgitation or valve obstruction and 
persisting heart failure or echocardiographic signs of poor hemodynamic 
tolerance 
Urgent 
Aortic /mitral IE with severe regurgitation and no HF 
Elective 
Uncontrolled Infection 
 
Locally uncontrolled infection (abscess/aneurysm/fistula/enlarging 
vegetation) 
Urgent 
Persisting fever and positive blood culture >7-10 days 
Urgent 
Infection caused by fungi or multiresistant organism 
Urgent

<<<PAGE 167>>>
162 
 
Prevention of Embolism 
 
Aortic/mitral IE with large vegetation(>10mm) following episode of 
embolism despite appropriate antibiotic therapy 
Urgent 
Aortic/mitral IE with large vegetation(>10mm) and predictor of a 
complicated course 
Urgent 
Isolated very large vegetation(>15mm) 
Urgent 
 
References 
 
1. Soman R, Gupta N, Shetty A, Rodrigues C. Implications for diagnosis and treatment of 
infective endocarditis: Eight year experience of an Infectious Diseases Team in a private 
Tertiary care centre. J Assoc Physicians India 2018; 66: 22-25. 
2. Gupta N, Agarwal V, Bhan A, Chandra P, Kasliwal RR, Mittal S, Voleti PR, Sekhar L, 
Baweja U, Sarma S, Kumar N, Sengupta S, Mehta Y, Trehan N. It’s ID: A friend in need 
for IE. CIDSCON, New Delhi, 21-23 August, 2015(Abstract #192). 
3. Soman R, Gupta N, Shetty A, Rodrigues C. Intravascular stent-related endocarditis due to 
rapidly growing mycobacteria : A new problem in the developing world. J Assoc Physicians 
India 2015: 63: 18-21. 
4. Soman R, Gupta N, Sunavala A, Madan S, Shetty A, Rodrigues C. Changing face of 
infective endocarditis. Program and abstracts of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America, San Francisco, California. Oct 2-6, 2013 (Abstract #1271). 
5. Gupta N, Chawla S et al. Antibiotic therapy in infective endocarditis. Rational antimicrobial 
practice in pediatrics, 3rd ed. 2018: chapter 27, p292-298. 
6. Kundavaram Paul Prabhakar Abhilash, Shalom Patole et al. Changing trends of infective 
endocarditis in India: A South Indian Experience. A Multifaceted Peer Reviewed Journal in 
the field of Cardiology 2017; 8(2):56-60. 
7. Agarwal R, Bahl VK, Malaviya AN. Changing spectrum of clinical and laboratory profile of 
infective endocarditis. J Assoc Physicians India 1992; 40:721-3. 
8. Garg N, Kandpal B, Tewari Set al. Characteristics of infective endocarditis in a developing 
country-clinical profile and outcome in 192 Indian patients, 1992-2001. Int J Cardiol 2005; 
15; 98:253-60. 
9. Baddour LM., Wilson WR, Bayer AS et al. Infective Endocarditis in Adults: Diagnosis, 
antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications. Circulation 2015; 132:1-53. 
10. Fowler VG, Scheld WM, Bayer AS. Endocarditis and intravascular infections. Principles and 
Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed, GL Mandell et al (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier 
Churchill Livingstone, 2015: chapter 82, p990-1028. 
11. Palraj R, Knoll BM, Baddor LM, Wilson WR. Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis. Principles and 
Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed, GL Mandell et al (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier 
Churchill Livingstone, 2015: chapter 83, p1029-1040. 
12. Habib G, Lancellotti P, Antunes MJ, Bongiorni MG, Casalta JP, Zotti FD et al. 2015 ESC 
guidelines for the management of infective endocarditis. Eur Heart J. 2015: 1-54. 
13. Gould FK, Denning DW, Elliott TSJ, Foweraker J, Perry JD, Prendergast BD et al. 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and antibiotic treatment of endocarditis in adults: a report of the 
working party of the British Society for Antimicrobial chemotherapy. J Antimicrob 
chemother. 2012; 67: 269-289.

<<<PAGE 168>>>
163 
 
14. Gavalda` J, Torres C, Tenorio C, Lo´pez P, Zaragoza M, Capdevila JA, et al. Efficacy of 
ampicillin plus ceftriaxone in treatment of experimental endocarditis due to Enterococcus 
faecalis strains highly resistant to aminoglycosides. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1999; 
43:639-46. 
15. Kang DH, Kim YJ, Kim SH, Sun BJ, Kim DH, Yun SC, Song JM, Choo SJ, Chung 
CH, Song JK, Lee JW, Sohn DW. Early surgery versus conventional treatment for infective. 
endocarditis. N Engl J Med 2012; 366:2466–2473. 
 
 
Names of the contributors: 
 
1. Dr.Neha Gupta 
Consultant Infectious Diseases, 
Medanta- The Medicity & Fortis Memorial research Institute (FMRI) 
Gurugram.

<<<PAGE 169>>>
164 
 
CHAPTER: 14 
Tables on Duration, Drug Interaction, Dosage and Administration 
 
Table 14.1: Duration, Drug Interaction, Dosage and Administration 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Name 
Daily Dose 
 
Maximum 
daily dose 
Dose modification 
with CrCl 
(ml/min) 
Available 
Re-
constitut
e 
Further 
Dilution 
Incompatibility 
Infusion 
time 
(mins) 
Additional comments 
 
 1 
Benzylpenicilli
n Inj. 
 
Low Dose: 0.6 
to 1.2 MU q 4 
hrs IM per day 
 
High Dose: 20 -
40 lac Units IV 
q 4 hourly 
(For 
meningococcal 
meningitis, the 
administration 
should be done q 
2h 
24 million 
Units 
10-50 , decrease 
dose by 25%, 
<10%, decrease 
dose by 50% , post 
HD 
5 lacs / 10 
lacs 
3 ml of 
WFI 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
IV incompatibilities 
include 
dobutamine, 
dopamine, 
norepinephrine, 
gentamicin, 
vancomycin, 
cefazolin, 
erythromycin, 
lidocaine, 
morphine, - 
30 min 
Cross sensitivity to most 
cephalosporins, β 
lactams. No cross 
sensitivity to aztreonam. 
Probenecid, 
indomethacin, 
sulfonamides, thiazides, 
salicylates may increase 
its level due to inhibition 
of tubular secretion 
potassium chloride 
1MU of penicillin G 
potassium contains 0.3 
mEq of Na and 1.68 
mEq of K. Caution 
should be exercised 
when given in high 
doses 
 2 
Cloxacillin Inj 
Most infections: 
1 g 4 hourly ( 6 
g) 
Serious 
infections: 2 g 4 
hourly (12 g) 
12 g 
NC 
250/500mg 
. 
500 mg 
in 10 ml 
of NS or 
5% 
dextrose 
Blood products 
or with lipid 
emulsions. A list of 
19 drugs have been 
shown to be 
incompatible with 
Inject 
slowly 
over 3-4 
minutes 
bactericidal for 
methicillin sensitive 
 S. aureus ( MSSA): 
Potential to interact with 
probenecid, 
methotrexate and

<<<PAGE 170>>>
165 
 
cloxacillin in some 
studies although 
these are not listed 
in prescribing 
information 
warfarin 
 3 
Ampicillin Inj. 
 
 2 g 4 hourly ( 
total 12 g/day) 
 
12 g 
< 10-20: 0.5-1 g 8 
hourly 
HD: 1 g 12 hourly; 
1 g post HD 
500 mg 
5 ml of 
WFI 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
 
30-60 min 
Prolonged infusion* 
Increased incidence of 
rashes with allopurinol 
 4 
Amoxicillin 
sodium & 
clavulanate 
potassium 
(each 30 mg 
contains 25 mg 
Amoxicillin & 
5 mg 
clavulanate 
 
 
 
 Usual dose: 1.2 
g 8 hourly 
Severe 
infections: 1.2 g 
6 hourly 
 
10-30: 1.2 g IV stat 
followed by 600 mg 
12 hourly 
 
<10: 1.2 g IV stat 
followed by 600 mg 
OD 
300 mg / 
600 mg / 
1.2 g 
 
300 mg / 
600 mg / 
1.2 g 
5 ml of 
WFI per 
300 mg 
 
5 ml of 
WFI per 
300 mg 
None 
 
 
50 – 100 
ml of NS 
( 50 ml 
of NS 
per 600 
mg 
Augment
in) 
 
Aminoglycosides, 
blood products, 
glucose, dextran, 
bicarbonate iv lipid 
emulsions 
 
4 
min 
(BOLUS) 
30 – 40 
min 
(INFUSIO
N) 
Prolonged infusion* 
Potential to interact with 
acenocoumarol, warfarin 
and probenecid 
 5 
Ampicillin & 
Sulbactam Inj 
1.5- 3 g 6 
hourly; for 
Acinetobacter 
3g iv q 4hourly 
Ampicillin: 
12 g 
 
Sulbactam 
: 4 g 
< 30 : 1.5-3 g 12 
hourly 
< 15: 1.5- 3 g OD 
1.5 g/ 0.75 
g 
 
 
1.5 g / 0.75 
g 
5 ml 
WFI 
 
 
 2 ml of 
WFI per 
0.75 g 
None 
 
 
25 ml of 
N.S. / 
0.75 g 
Aminoglycosides 
5 min 
(BOLUS) 
 
15-30 min 
(INFUSIO
N) 
Prolonged infusion* 
Probenecid may impair 
its excretion 
 6 
Piperacillin 
sodium & 
Tazobactam 
Inj. 
 4.5 g 8 hourly 
Severe 
infections and 
anti-
Pseudomonal 
coverage: 4.5 g 
6 hourly 
Piperacillin 
16 g / 
tazobactam 
2 g 
20-40:3.375g, 
q6h;<20-2.25gq 6h, 
HD, 2.25g, q 8h. 
Loading dose must 
always be given 
irrespective of 
status of clearance 
2.25 g/ 4.5 
g 
5 ml of 
WFI per 
gm of 
Piperacill
in 
( 20 ml 
for 4.5 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
RL, blood products, 
albumin, 
hydrolysates, 
aminoglycosides 
 
30 min 
 
 
1 vial ( 4.5 g of 
piperacillin-tazobactam) 
has 12 meq of sodium 
. 
Prolonged infusion* 
 
Potential for interaction

<<<PAGE 171>>>
166 
 
An additional dose 
of 0.75g 
piperacillin-
tazobactam should 
be administered 
following each 
hemodialysis 
session 
gm of 
piperacill
in-
tazobacta
m) 
with warfarin, heparin 
and methotrexate. May 
prolong neuromuscular 
blockade of vecuronium 
 
Increased nephrotoxicity 
if combined with 
vancomycin 
 7 
Ticarcillin & 
Clavulanic acid 
50 mg/kg/day 
 
Usual dose: 3.1 
g 6 hourly 
Severe 
infections: 3.1 g 
4 hourly 
 
 
 
30- 60: 2 g 4 
hourly 10 – 
30: 2 g 8 hourly 
< 10: 2 g 12 hourly 
< 10 with hepatic 
dysfunction: 2 g 
OD Patients on 
peritoneal dialysis: 
3.1 g 12 hourly 
Patients on HD: 2 
g 12 hourly,with 
3.1 g post HD 
3.1 g 
13 ml of 
WFI 
50 ml of 
N.S. 
Sodium 
bicarbonate, 
aminoglycoside 
 
30 min 
Prolonged infusion* 
Probenecid may 
decrease its elimination 
 8 
Cefazolin 
Sodium Inj. 
 
50 mg/kg/day in 
three divided 
doses 
 
Usual dose: 1 g 
8 hourly 
For severe 
infections: 2 g 6-
8 hourly 
 
8 g 
35-54 : Full doses 
at 8 hourly interval, 
11-34-half the usual 
dose every 12 h, 
less than 10- half 
the usual dose 
every 24h: 0 
 
 
500 mg / 1 
g 
10 ml of 
WFI 
30 ml of 
NS 
- 
10 min 
Do not give as prolonged 
infusion for preoperative 
prophylaxi 
Probenecid may 
decrease renal tubular 
secretion

<<<PAGE 172>>>
167 
 
 9 
Cefuroxime 
Sodium Inj. 
 
30-100 (60 
mg/kg/day) in 
three divided 
doses 
 
 
Adults:750 mg 8 
hourly 
Serious 
infections : 1.5 g 
8 hourly 
 
 - 
10-20: 750 mg 12 
hourly 
 
 
< 10 : 750 mg OD 
 
250 mg / 
750 mg / 
1.5 g 
 
250 mg / 
750 mg / 
1.5 g 
2/6/15 ml 
of WFI 
 
 
2/6/15 ml 
of WFI 
None 
 
 
 
50-100 
ml of NS 
- 
 
 
 
Aminoglycosides 
sodium bicarbonate 
5 min 
(BOLUS) 
 
 
15-30 min 
(INFUSIO
N) 
 
Do not give as prolonged 
infusion for preoperative 
prophylaxis 
 
 
10 
Cefotaxime 
Sodium Inj. 
 
100 mg/kg/day 
in 3-4 divided 
doses 
 
 
Usual dose: 1 g 
8 hourly 
Severe 
infections: 2 g 4- 
8 hourly 
 
 
 
12 g 
< 50-10: 2g 12 
hourly 
 
<10::: 2 g OD 
 
250 mg / 1 
g 
5 ml of 
WFI 
20 ml of 
NS 
Aminoglycosides 
10 min 
Prolonged infusion* 
 
 
11 
Ceftriaxone 
Inj. 
 
50-100 (60 
mg/kg/day) in 
two divided 
doses 
Usual dose2 gm 
OD 
Meningitis, 
synergistic 
treatment for 
enterococcal 
endocarditis: 2 g 
12 hourly 
 
 
 4 g 
NC 
 
250 mg / 1 
g 
10 ml of 
WFI 
50 ml of 
NS 
Aminoglycosides, 
Vancomycin, 
fluconazole 
calcium-
containing IV 
solutions like RL, 
TPN 
30 min 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CI in hyperbilirubinemia

<<<PAGE 173>>>
168 
 
 
 
12 
Ceftazidime 
Inj. BOLUS 
 
 
Ceftazidime 
Inj. INFUSION 
 
 
Usual dose : 2 g 
8 hourly 
Severe 
infections : 2 g 
6-8 hourly 
 8 g 
< 50 -30 1g iv bd 
30-10: 1g iv OD 
<10: 500 mg OD 
250 / 500 / 
1 g / 2 g 
 
 
250 mg / 
500 mg / 1 
g / 2 g 
2.5 ml of 
WFI / 
250 mg 
 
 
2.5 ml of 
WFI / 
250 mg 
None 
 
 
 
50 ml of 
N.S. 
- 
 
 
 
Sodium bicarbonate 
aminoglycosides, 
vancomycin 
5 min 
 
 
 
15 – 30 
min 
Nephrotoxicity with 
concomitantly 
administered 
nephrotoxic agents such 
as aminoglycosides..or 
potent diuretic such as 
furosemide 
Contains 2.3mEq of Na 
per gram of ceftazidime 
 
 
 
 
13 
Cefoperazone 
(CPZ) sodium 
Inj. BOLUS 
 
Cefoperazone 
sodium Inj. 
INFUSION 
40-80 
mg/kg/day 
 
Usual dose: 2 g 
12 hourly (4 g 
/day) 
Severe 
infections : 2-4 g 
8 hourly 
 
 
 8 g 
 
NC 
 
 
1 g / 2 g 
 
 
1 g / 2 g 
1 ml 
WFI / 
100 mg 
 
5 ml of 
WFI / g 
None 
 
 
20 – 100 
ml of 
N.S. / g 
Sodium bicarbonate 
aminoglycosides 
 
5 min 
 
 
15 – 60 
min 
Concomitant severe 
hepatic & renal 
dysfunction : Not more 
than 2 g/day 
 
Prolonged infusion* 
 
14 
Sulbactam 
(SBT) & 
Cefoperazone 
(CPZ) sodium 
Inj.( 1:1) 
 
 Sulbactam 
(SBT)& 
Cefoperazone 
(CPZ) sodium 
Inj. ( 1:2) 
 
 
Usual dose: 
SBT/CPZ (1:1) : 
40-80 
mg/kg/day 
SBT/CPZ (1:2) : 
60-120 
mg/kg/day 
 
 
SBT/CPZ (1:2) 
Usual dose : 3 g 
12 hourly 
Serious 
SBT/CPZ 
(1:1) : 8 g 
(i.e. SBT 4 
g/CPZ 4g) 
 
SBT/CPZ 
(1:2) : 12 
g ( i.e. 
SBT 4 
g/CPZ 8g) 
 
Max dose 
of 
Sulbactam 
requires renal 
dose modification 
< 30-15: 1 g 12 
hourly 
 ( max 2 g/day) 
< 15 : 500 mg 12 
hourly (max 1 
g/day) 
 
<30-15:Inj 
cefoperazone/sulba
ctam (1:2) 1.5 g 8 
1 g: 
(cefoperaz
one 0.5 g + 
sulbactam 
0.5 g) 
 
 
1.5 g: 
(cefoperaz
one 1 g + 
sulbactam 
0.5 g ) 
3 g: 
3.4 ml of 
WFI per 
1 g vial 
 
 
 
3.2 ml of 
WFI per 
1 g vial 
 
 
100 ml 
of RL 
Sodium bicarbonate 
aminoglycosides 
 
15 – 20 
min 
RL should not be used 
for the initial 
reconstitution as the 
mixture is incompatible 
 
Prolonged infusion*

<<<PAGE 174>>>
169 
 
infections: 6 g 
12 hourly 
sulbactam: 
4 g/day 
hourly or 3 g 12 
hourly 
 
< 15: Inj 
cefoperazone/sulb
actam (1:1) 1 g 12 
hourly 
plus 
Inj cefoperazone 
1 g 12 hourly 
 
( At least total 
daily dose of 
cefoperazone - 3 g/ 
day) 
(cefoperaz
one 2 g + 
sulbactam 
1 g 
 
15 
Cefepime Inj. 
 
 
150 mg/kg/day 
in three divided 
doses 
 
Usual dose: 2 g 
12 hourly 
Severe 
infections: 2 g 8 
-12 hourly 
 
 6 g 
< 50-10: 1 g OD 
< 10: 0.5-1 g OD 
Hemodialysis 
patients: 1 g on day 
1 then 500 mg 
everyday 
250 / 500 / 
1 g 
2.5 ml of 
WFI / 
250 mg 
50 – 100 
ml of 
N.S. 
- 
30 min 
Prolonged infusion* 
 
High doses may cause 
encephalopathy if 
creatinine clearance 
reduced 
 
 
16 
Cefpirome 
sulphate Inj. 
 
 
50 mg/kg/day in 
two divided 
doses 
 
Usual dose: 1 g 
12 hourly 
Severe 
infections: 2 g 
12 hourly 
 4 g 
2 g loading dose 
followed by 
< 50-20 : 1 gm 12 
hourly 
20-5 : 1 gm OD 
1 g 
 
 
 
 
1 g 
10 ml of 
WFI 
 
 
 
 
10 ml of 
WFI 
None 
 
 
 
 
100 ml 
of NS 
per g 
 
 
 
 
Sodium bicarbonate 
 
4 min 
(BOLUS) 
 
 
20 – 30 
min 
(INFUSIO
N) 
Avoid with nephrotoxic 
agents 
( aminoglycosides, loop 
diuretics) 
Not recommended in 
children 
 
 
Cefepime-
tazobactam inj 
50/12.5 
mg/kg/day in 
 2g per 
dose 
Loading dose 
followed by 
1000/125 
mg 
10 ml of 
WFI per 
500 ml 
of NS 
RL 
30 min 
Interactions with 
aminoglycosides-

<<<PAGE 175>>>
170 
 
17 
two divided 
doses 
 
Usual dose: 
1.125gm IV 
12hourly 
Severe 
infections: 2.25g 
IV 8-12hourly 
 
 
 Max: 6 g 
< 60-30: 500/62.5 
mg OD 
<10: 250/31.25 mg 
OD 
 
HD: 1000/125 mg 
on day 1, then 
500/62.5 mg OD 
 
Should be given 
Post HD 
 
vial 
nephrotoxicity & 
ototoxicity 
 
Heparin- coagulopathy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
Imipenem & 
Cilastatin 
Sodium Inj. 
For most 
infections : 500 
mg 6 hourly 
Severe 
infections : 1 g q 
8 hourly 
 4 g 
If initial dose is 500 
mg 6 hourly, then 
 Loading dose of 
500 mg IV stat 
followed by 
< 70-41: 500 mg 8 
hourly 
<40-21: 500 mg 12 
hourly 
< 20 or HD : 250 
mg OD 
<5: do not give 
until HD is initiated 
within 48 hrs 
 
Patients on 
hemodialysis 
should receive 
imipenem after 
dialysis 
500 mg 
20 ml of 
WFI 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
per 500 
mg 
Lactate and diluents 
containing lactates 
 
30 min 
 Risk of seizures if renal 
dysfunction, CNS 
infection 
(meningitis, SOL) and 
Gancyclovi Patients 
receiving valproic acid 
concomitantly may 
require measurement of 
valproic acid levels 
 
Prolonged infusion* 
 
19 
Meropenem 
Inj. 
Usual dose: 1 g 
8 hourly 
Meningitis or 
treatment of 
 6 g 
<50: Loading dose 
of 1 gm IV stat 
followed 
by 
maintenance dose 
500 mg / 1 
g 
5 ml of 
WFI per 
250 mg 
50 ml of 
N.S. 
Should not be 
added to or mixed 
with other drugs 
 
15 – 30 
min 
 
Prolonged infusion*

<<<PAGE 176>>>
171 
 
resistant gram 
negatives : 120 
mg/kg/day in 
three divided 
doses (2 g 8 
hourly) 
as follows 
26-50, 12 hourly 
10-25, half of the 
dose at 12 hourly 
interval 
<10, half dose at 24 
hr interval 
 
20 
Vancomycin 
hydrochloride 
Inj. 
Loading dose 
25-30 mg/kg of 
actual body wt 
followed by 
maintenance 
dose of 
Usual dose: 15 
mg/kg Q8-2 
hourly 
Meningitis: 15 
mg/kg 8-12 
hourly 
 
Adults (60 kgs 
with normal 
CrCL): 1.5 g 
(loading dose) 
followed by 1 
g 12 hourly 
 
 
 
 
Not to 
exceed 2 
g/dose 
 Dose mg /day: 
15.4 mg X CrCL 
 
HD: 1 g q48h (after 
HD 
500 mg / 1 
g 
10 ml of 
WFI per 
500 mg 
100 ml 
of 0.9 
% N.S. 
or 5% 
dextrose 
per 500 
mg 
 
Concentr
ations of 
no more 
than 
5 mg/mL 
 is 
recomm
ended in 
adults 
 
In 
selected 
patients 
in need 
of fluid 
restricti
on, a 
concentr
ation up 
to 10 
Alkaline solutions, 
β - lactam 
antibiotics 
Infusion 
rate not 
exceeding 
15 mg/min 
 
Usual 
infusion 
rate: 
1 g in 200 
ml 0.9% 
NS over 
60 min & 
500 mg in 
100 ml 
0.9% NS 
over 30 
min 
 
0 to 500 
mg in 100 
ml 
( 30 
minutes ) 
501-1250 
mg in 250 
ml ( 60 
minutes ) 
1251-
Vancomycin trough 
levels to be drawn1 hour 
before the 5th dose of 
vancomycin 
 
Recommended trough 
levels is 10-15 μg/ml in 
mild-moderate and 15-
20 μg/ml in serious 
infections-. 
 Nephrotoxicity (0-
12%) is associated with 
vancomycin trough 
levels greater than or 
equal to 15 μg/mL, 
high dose vancomycin 
( greater or equal to 4 
g/day), concomitant use 
of nephrotoxic agents 
and piperacillin-
tazobactam, and 
duration 
of vancomycin therapy 
Concomitant use of 
opioids may increase the 
potential for redman 
syndrome

<<<PAGE 177>>>
172 
 
mg/mL 
may be 
used 
1750mg in 
500ml ( 90 
minutes ) 
1751-
2250mg in 
500 ml ( 
120 
minutes ) 
 
If red-man 
syndrome- 
Infusion 
can be 
increased 
over 3 
hours 
 
 
 
21 
Teicoplanin 
Inj. BOLUS 
 
Teicoplanin 
Inj. INFUSION 
 
Loading dose of 
6 mg/kg 12 
hourly for first 3 
doses followed 
by 6 mg/kg OD 
Usual dose : 400 
mg IV 12 hourly 
for 3 doses 
followed by 400 
mg OD 
 
For more serious 
infections 
12 mg/kg BD 
for 3 doses 
followed by 12 
mg/kg OD 
 
 
- 
< 60-40 or on HD, 
the chosen dose (6 
or 
12 
mg/kg) 
should 
be 
administered every 
48 hours and 72 
hours, respectively. 
 
Maximum dose in 
patients on HD: 10 
mg/kg every 48 to 
72 hours. 
200 mg / 
400 mg 
 
 
200 mg / 
400 mg 
 
 
1.5 ml of 
WFI per 
200 mg 
 
 
1.5 ml of 
WFI per 
200 mg 
none 
 
 
 
100 ml 
of NS 
Aminoglycosides 
 
 
 
Aminoglycosides 
 
 
1 min 
 
 
 
30 min 
Bone marrow 
suppression- Monitor 
with CBC weekly

<<<PAGE 178>>>
173 
 
 
 
22 
Daptomycin Inj 
6 mg/kg/day for 
SSTI, 10-12 
mg/kg/day for 
severe infections 
and endocarditis 
 
 
 
< 30: every 48 
hours 
350mg 
 
350 mg 
in 100 ml 
of NS 
Dextrose solution 
 
30 min 
Check CPK on day 7, 
 Avoid statins 
 
 
 
23 
Tigecycline Inj 
100 mg IV stat 
followed by 50 
mg 12 hourly 
Child Pugh 
Class C- 100 
mg IV loading 
dose followed 
by 25 mg 12 
hourly 
For hospital 
acquired 
infections or 
Acinetobacter, 
200 mg IV stat, 
followed by 100 
mg IV q12h 
 
 200 mg 
( 
maximum 
tolerated 
dose) 
NC 
50 mg 
5 ml of 
NS 
50 mg in 
100 ml 
of NS 
Should not be 
administered 
through the same 
line -AmB-d, 
ABLC, diazepam, 
esmoprazole, 
omeprazole 
 
 60 min 
Give IV Tigecycline 
with food to decrease 
nausea and vomiting 
 
 
Carries a black-box 
warning for VAP/HAP, 
potential to cause 
pancreatitis, risk of 
increased mortality. 
Potential to interact with 
warfarin. It can cause 
fetal harm if given to 
pregnant woman 
 
 
24 
 
Clindamycin 
Inj. 
 
Usual dose: 600-
900 mg every 8 
hourly 
Oral dose: 300 
mg three-four 
times a day 
 
 2700 mg 
( 900 mg 8 
hourly) 
NC 
 
300 / 600 
mg 
 
20 ml of 
WFI 
 
20 ml of 
NS 
It is incompatible 
with ampicillin, 
phenytoin, 
barbiturates, 
aminophylline, 
calcium gluconate 
and magnesium 
sulphate 
20 min 
Diarrhoea (20%) 
C. difficile colitis (0.01-
10%), minor reversible 
transaminases 
alterations. 
 
The neuromuscular 
blockade action may be 
potentiated. Rifampicin 
a strong inducer of 
CYP3A4 may reduce its 
level. It should not be

<<<PAGE 179>>>
174 
 
coadministered with 
erythromycin as invitro 
antagonism has been 
demonstrated 
 
25 
Amikacin 
Sulphate Inj. 
 
15 mg/kg IV 
OD. 
 
Dosing beyond 
48 hours should 
be accompanied 
by determination 
of peak levels 
done after 1 hr 
of dosing (56-
64mcg/ml), and 
trough 
concentration 
(<1mcg/ml) 
 
 
Ideal body 
weight (IBW) 
should be used 
for dose 
calculation 
 
 1 g 
 
40-59, :15 
mg/kgq36h 
30-39-
15mg/kgq48h 
<30- Not 
recommended 
Patient on 
intermittent 
dialysis, the dose 
should be given 
after dialysis 
 
 
500 / 100 
mg 
 
1 ml of 
WFI / 
500 mg 
 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
 
all antibiotics 
60 min 
Administration with 
agents causing the 
following side effects 
should be avoided 
Nephrotoxicity 
(polymyxins, cisplatin, 
vancomycin, 
amphotericin), 
ototoxicity (ethacrynic 
acid, furosemide), 
neuromuscular blockade 
(suxamethonium, 
halogenated 
hydrocarbon inhalation, 
opioids, citrated 
anticoagulated blood) 
 
 
26 
Gentamicin Inj. 
 
4-5 mg/kg/day 
- 
7mg/kg may be 
necessary in 
critically ill 
patients) 
 
Split dose may 
be preferable in 
infective 
 1 g 
Cr CL 40-60, -
5mg/kg q36hr 
<40_4 mg/kg, next 
dose should 
prefereably be on 
the basis of 
concentration and if 
definitely needed 
 
 
 
60 / 80 mg 
 
2 ml of 
WFI 
 
50 ml 
 
all antibiotics 
 
20 min 
Administration with 
agents carusing the 
following side effects 
should be avoided 
Nephrotoxicity(polymyx
ins, cisplatin, 
vancomycin, 
amphotericin), 
ototoxicity (ethacrynic 
acid, furosemide),

<<<PAGE 180>>>
175 
 
endocarditis, 
 
Peak (3-5mg/L) 
and trough: 
<1mg/l levels 
should be 
targeted 
 
 Ideal body 
weight (IBW) 
should be used 
for dose 
calculation 
 
 
 
 
neuromuscular blockade 
(suxamethonium, 
halogenated 
hydrocarbon inhalation, 
opioids, citrated 
anticoagulated blood) 
 
 
 
27 
Tobramycin 
Inj. 
4-5mg/kg q 24h 
7mg/kg may be 
necessary in 
critically ill 
patients) 
Peak and (3-
5mg/L), trough: 
<1mg/l 
tobramycin 
levels should be 
targeted 
 
 Ideal body 
weight (IBW) 
should be used 
for dose 
calculation 
 1 g 
 
Cr CL 40-60, -
5mg/kg q36hr 
<40_4 mg/kg, next 
dose should 
preferably be on the 
basis of 
concentration and if 
definitely needed 
 
 
 
60 / 80 mg 
 
2 ml of 
WFI 
 
50 ml 
all antibiotics 
 
20 min 
 
Administration with 
agents causing the 
following side effects 
should be avoided 
Nephrotoxicity(polymyx
ins, cisplatin, 
vancomycin, 
amphotericin), 
ototoxicity (ethacrynic 
acid, furosemide), 
neuromuscular blockade 
(suxamethonium, 
halogenated 
hydrocarbon inhalation, 
opioids, citrated 
anticoagulated blood) 
 
28 
Azithromycin 
Inj. 
 
For most 
infections: 
500 mg OD 
Enteric fever: 
(20 mg/kg/day) 
 
 1 g 
NC 
 
500 mg 
 
4.8 ml of 
WFI 
 
250-500 
ml of NS 
- 
 
20 min 
Empty stomach 
ECG: QTc prolongation. 
Potential for drug 
interactions with the 
following agents needs

<<<PAGE 181>>>
176 
 
to be watched for – 
carbamazepine, digoxin, 
fluconazole, nelfinavir, 
efavirenz, indinavir, 
zidovudine, warfarin 
 
29 
 
Ciprofloxacin 
Inj 
 
400 mg 8-12 
hourly 
 
 
 800 mg 
 
< 50 : 50% of dose 
OD 
 
 
200 mg 
- 
 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
Solutions 
containing 
multivalent cations 
such as magnesium 
 
60 min 
Use of tizanidine is 
contraindicated with 
ciprofloxacin. Clinically 
significant interactions 
may occur when it is 
given with phenytoin, 
theophylline, 
cyclosporine, drugs 
known to cause 
prolongation of QT 
interval, methotrexate, 
NSAIDs, duloxetine, 
warfarin 
 
 
30 
 
Levofloxacin 
Inj. 
 
 
500-750 mg OD 
 
 750 mg 
50-10 : 50% of dose 
OD 
< 10 : 25 % of dose 
OD or 50% dose 
every 48 hrs 
 
500 mg 
- 
 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
Solutions 
containing 
multivalent cations 
such as magnesium 
 
60 – 90 
min 
Caution should be 
exercised ehen 
administered with 
NSAIDs and 
 
 
31 
 
Ofloxacin Inj 
 
 
 400 mg 12 
hourly 
 
 
 800 mg 
 
< 10 :50 % of dose 
OD 
 
200 mg 
- 
 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
 
Heparin solutions 
 
60 min 
(Slow 
infusion) 
Maximum dose is 400 
mg in patients with 
cirrhosis 
Maintain adequate 
hydration 
 
 
32 
 
Metronidazole 
Inj. 
 
 Loading dose of 
15 mg/kg, then 
7.5 mg/kg 8 
hourly or 15 
mg/kg q12h 
 
Adults: usual 
 
 4 g 
 
< 10: 50% of usual 
dose 12 hourly 
 
500 mg 
- 
 
100 ml 
of N.S. 
- 
 
30 min 
 
End stage liver disease: 
50% of usual dose 12 
hourly

<<<PAGE 182>>>
177 
 
dose 500 mg 8 
hourly or 1g 
q12h 
 
 
 
33 
 
Colistimethate 
Inj 
Loading dose of 
9-12 million unit 
( MU) followed 
by 4.5mu q12h 
Nebulized 
Colistin: 4.5 
million units, 
q12 hourly 
 
Intrathecal/ventr
icular dose of 
colistin: 
125,000 IU/day 
 9 
million 
units 
 
Cr CL 50-79: 2.5-
3.8 mg CBA/kg/day 
in 2 divided doses 
CrCL 30-49: 2.5 
mg/kg/da o.d 
Cr Cl:10-29:1.5 mg 
CBA /kg every 36 
hours 
 
 
 
CBA 1 
mg=30,00
0 U of 
CMS (It is 
advisable 
to read the 
manufactur
er’s 
instruction 
since it 
may vary 
 
10 ml of 
0.9 % NS 
 
40 ml of 
0.9 % NS 
Mixing drugs in 
infusion, injections, 
nebulizer solutions. 
Erythromycin, 
tetracycline, 
cephalothin may 
lead to precipitation 
 
 
30 min for 
each 1 
million 
unit 
Neurotoxicity, 
nephrotoxicity, transient 
sensory disturbances, 
facial paraesthesias, 
confusion, psychosis, 
nephrotoxicity 
 
 
 
34 
Polymyxin B 
15,000 to 25,000 
U/kg/day iv 
divided every 12 
horus 
Intrathercal/Intra
ventricular-
50,000 U once 
daily for 3 to 4 
days, then every 
alternate day 
25,000 
U/kg/day 
NA 
5L IU 
5% 
dexrose 
300-
500ml of 
5% 
Dextrose 
for 
continuo
us drip, 
For 
intrathec
al 
administr
ation 
dissolve 
in NS 
Unstable in alkaline 
solutions 
30-60 mins 
May enhance the 
neuromuscular blocking 
effect of neuromuscular 
blockers. Concomitant 
administration with 
nephrotoxic and 
neurotoxic drugs should 
be avaoided

<<<PAGE 183>>>
178 
 
Table 14.2: Duration, Drug Interaction, Dosage and Administration for Antifungal Agents 
 
S.N
o 
Name 
Dose 
 
Maximum 
daily dose 
Dose 
modification 
With CrCl 
(ml/min)
Available 
Reconstitute 
Further 
Dilution 
Incompatibility 
Infusion 
time 
(mins) 
Additional comments 
 
1. 
 
Amphotericin 
B 
–
deoxycholate 
(AmB-d) 
 
 
 0.5-1.5 
mg/kg/day in 
D-5% 
over 
24 hours 
 
 
1.5 mg /kg 
 
Not required 
 
50 mg 
 
5 ml of WFI 
 
500 ml of 
5% 
Dextrose 
 
NS 
- 
precipitates 
with 0.9% NS 
 
4 hours 
 
Test 
doses 
are 
unnecessary 24h infusion 
and 
saline loading, with 1 L of 
saline 
before 
AmB 
associated 
with 
less 
nephrotoxicity. 
 
Avoid 
nephrotoxic 
agents-NSAIDS, 
aminoglycosides. 
Good hydration with K 
rich diet 
2. 
Amphotericin 
B- liposomal 
3-
5mg/kg/day, 
once a day 
5mg/kg 
Not required 
50mg 
12 
ml 
of 
sterile WFI 
5%Dextros
e to give a 
final 
concentrati
on of 1-2 
mg/ml 
 
NS 
- 
precipitates 
with 0.9% NS. 
Any other drug 
120 
minutes 
Use 
of 
corticosteroids 
may 
potentiate 
hypokalemia. 
Concomitant 
administration with other 
nephrotoxic drugs should 
be avoided 
 
3. 
 
Fluconazole 
 
For 
candidemia: 
loading dose 
of 12 mg/kg 
IV stat 
followed by 
maintenance 
dose of 6 
mg/kg/day 
 
Usual dose: 
 
1200 mg 
 
< 50 : 50 % 
of dose 
HD: 100 % 
dose post 
HD 
 
100ml 
contains 
200 mg 
 - 
 - 
 - 
 
20 min 
Interactions: 
Prolonged QTc with 
hypokalemia, 
hypomagnesimia, 
cardiomyopathy, 
Ivabradine, cisapride, 
astemizole, terfenadine 
Fluconazole significantly 
increase levels of 
cyclosporine, tacrolimus, 
rifabutin ( uveitis), 
phenytoin, theophylline

<<<PAGE 184>>>
179 
 
loading dose 
of 800 mg 
followed by 
maintenance 
dose of 200 
mg o.d 
 
Rifampicin decreases 
levels of fluconazole. 
Hypoglycemia with oral 
hypoglycemic, PT 
prolongation with 
coumarin-type 
anticoagulation 
 
4. 
Voriconazole 
Loading dose 
of 6 mg/kg 
12 hourly 
followed by 4 
mg/kg 12 
hourly 
 
Target trough 
concentration 
of 1-5 mg/l 
 
NC 
 
IV 
preparation 
containing 
cyclodextrin 
should not be 
administered
in Patients 
with CrCL < 
50 
200 mg 
19 ml of 
WFI for each 
20 mg of 
voriconazole 
180 ml of 
0.9% NS 
for each 
each 20 
mg of 
voriconazo
le 
Must not be 
mixed or co-
administered 
with medical 
products or 
electrolytes 
 
Blood products 
must not be 
administered 
with 
voriconazole 
 
TPN infusion 
can be 
administered 
60 min 
Dose reduction : 
50 % of dose in Child-
pugh Class A/B 
 
Watch for Visual 
hallucinations, LFT 
alterations 
 
Contraindicated with 
rifampicin, 
carbamazepine, long 
acting barbiturates, 
phenytoin, Ivabradine. 
 
Interactions with 
 warfarin, Tacrolimus and 
cyclosporine 
 
5 
 
Caspofungin 
 
Loading dose 
of 70 mg 
followed by 
50 mg OD 
 
 
 
 70 mg 
 
NC 
 
70 mg/50 
mg 
 
10.5 ml of 
0.9 % NS or 
WFI 
 
0.9% NS 
( 250 ml 
for 70 mg) 
& 
100 ml for 
50 mg 
Not compatible 
with dextrose 
containing 
solutions 
 
Must not be 
mixed or co-
administered 
with medical 
products or 
electrolytes 
 
60 min 
Watch for: 
Allergic reactions, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, LFT 
alterations, anemia 
 
Interactions: Cyclosporine 
increases Caspofungin 
AUC by 35%. 
Cyclosporine levels are 
unchanged 
 
Caspofungin decreases 
Tacrolimua 12 hour blood 
concentrations 
 
Caspofungin levels are

<<<PAGE 185>>>
180 
 
reduced by phenytoin, 
rifampicin, 
dexamethasone, 
Efavirenz, nevirapine, & 
carbamazepine 
 
6. 
 
Anidulafungin 
 
Loading dose 
of 200 mg 
followed by 
100 mg OD 
 
 
 
 200 mg 
 
NC 
 
100 mg 
 
10.5 ml of 
0.9 % NS or 
WFI 
 
0.9% NS 
( 250 ml 
for 70 mg) 
& 
100 ml for 
50 mg 
Not compatible 
with dextrose 
containing 
solutions 
 
Must not be 
mixed or co-
administered 
with medical 
products or 
electrolytes 
 
60 min 
Watch for: 
Allergic reactions, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, LFT 
alterations, anemia 
 
 
 
7. 
 
Micafungin 
 
100 mg OD 
(No loading 
dose) 
 
 
 100 mg 
 
NC 
 
100 mg 
 
Package 
insert 
Package 
insert 
Must not be 
mixed or co-
administered 
with medical 
products or 
electrolytes 
 
60 min 
Few cases of immune-
mediated hemolysis have 
been reported 
 
 
 
WFI, Water for Injection; NC, No Change

<<<PAGE 186>>>
181 
 
*Prolonged infusions for β-lactams (penicillins, cephalosporins, and 
carbapenems): There is evidence that prolonged infusions will benefit the 
following patients: 
2) Critically ill patients 
3) Patients with infections with organisms which have MICs close to 
breakpoints. 
4) Patients who have large apparent volume of distribution (AVD) 
5) Patients with normal or increased GFR. 
 
This benefit is more likely with Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter rather than 
Enterobacteriaceae. 
 
 There is an issue of stability of the carbapenems in the infusion at the ambient 
temperature. 
 
 
*Prolonged infusion- Piperacillin-tazobactam- 4 hrs 
 Doripenem – 4 hrs 
 Meropenem- 3 hrs 
 Imipenem- 2 hrs 
 
 
Single daily dose of aminoglycosides is encouraged as it improves efficacy 
and decreases nephrotoxicity 
 
Drugs which are incompatible with aminoglycosides should be reconstituted 
and administered separately 
 
In case of drugs requiring loading dose, the loading dose should be given to 
all patients regardless of the patient’s creatinine clearance. Maintenance dose 
is based on the creatinine clearance 
 
Doxycycline P should be given with half a glass of water and patients 
advised to avoid recumbent postures for an hour afterwards to avoid 
esophagitis 
 
Oral fluoroquinolones and doxycycline should not be given with milk or milk 
products/calcium supplements as food decreases the absorption 
 
Moellering and associates formula for vancomycin dosing in patients with 
decreased creatinine clearance: Dose (mg/day) = 15.4 × creatinine clearance 
(mL/min). This formula is not to be used in anephric patients; instead, a dose of 
1.9 mg/kg/day should be given after a loading dose of 15 mg/kg. 
Renal clearance of cefoperazone -25 % and sulbactam -84 % 
Penicillins, Cephalosporins, FQ, Azoles are given post HD

<<<PAGE 187>>>
182 
 
References: 
1. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases 7th Edition 
eds, Mandell GL, Bennett DE, Dolin R. Philadelphia, Churchill Livingstone Elsevier 2010. 
 
2. Muralidharan G, Micalizzi M, Speth J et al. Pharmacokinetics of tigecycline after single and 
multiple doses in healthy subjects. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2005;49:220–229. 
 
 
Names of the contributors: 
1. 
Dr.Neha Gupta 
Consultant Infectious Diseases, 
Medanta- The Medicity & Fortis Memorial research Institute (FMRI) 
Gurugram. 
 
2. 
Dr Nusrat Shafiq Khan, 
Professor, 
Department of Pharmacology 
PGIMER, Chandigarh.

<<<PAGE 188>>>
183 
 
APPENDIX I 
ICMR data 2018 
 
Isolation rates of key pathogens, 2018: 
 
Table 1: Isolation rates of major groups of organisms in different specimen 
 
Total
n=60497 
(%) 
Blood
n=11783 
(%) 
Urine
n=13658 
(%) 
LRT
n =10058 
(%) 
SI
n=15208 
(%) 
DI
n=351
1 (%) 
SS
n =1409 
(%) 
CSF
n=390 
(%) 
Faeces
n=536 
(%) 
Others
n=3944 
(%) 
Enterobacteriaceae 
29666 
(49) 
4430 
(37.6) 
11180 
(81.9) 
3522 
(35) 
6243 
(41.1) 
1607 
(45.8) 
746 
(52.9) 
112 
(28.7) 
156 
(29.1) 
1670 
(42.3) 
Enteric Salmonella 
764 
(1.3) 
620 
(5.3) 
4 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
13 
(0.1) 
2 
(0.1) 
3 
(0.2) 
0 
(0) 
120 
(22.4) 
2 
(0.1) 
NFGNB 
13802 
(22.8) 
1862 
(15.8) 
919 
(6.7) 
5392 
(53.6) 
3325 
(21.9) 
883 
(25.1) 
296 
(21) 
158 
(40.5) 
5 
(0.9) 
962 
(24.4) 
Staphylococci 
10499 
(17.4) 
3153 
(26.8) 
144 
(1.1) 
617 
(6.1) 
4855 
(31.9) 
701 
(20) 
144 
(10.2) 
80 
(20.5) 
2 
(0.4) 
803 
(20.4) 
Enterococci 
3442 
(5.7) 
677 
(5.7) 
1259 
(9.2) 
21 
(0.2) 
727 
(4.8) 
304 
(8.7) 
162 
(11.5) 
28 
(7.2) 
10 
(1.9) 
254 
(6.4) 
Fungi 
1191 
(2) 
713 
(6.1) 
146 
(1.1) 
24 
(0.2) 
28 
(0.2) 
9 
(0.3) 
20 
(1.4) 
9 
(2.3) 
0 
(0) 
242 
(6.1) 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and Superficial Tissue. 
5. 
DI (Deep Infection) includes: Abscess aspirate, Pus aspirate, Deep Biopsy and Deep Tissue. 
6. 
CSF (Cerebrospinal fluid)

<<<PAGE 189>>>
184 
 
Table 2: Isolation rates of major species of organisms in different specimen 
 
Total 
n=60497 
(%) 
Blood 
n=11783 
(%) 
Urine 
n=13658 
(%) 
LRT 
n=10058 
(%) 
SI 
n=15208 
(%) 
DI 
n=3511 
(%) 
CSF 
n=390 
(%) 
SS 
n=1409 
(%) 
Others 
n=3944 
(%) 
Escherichia coli 
15582 
(26) 
2134 
(18) 
7853 
(58) 
755 
(8) 
2899 
(19) 
572 
(16) 
40 
(10) 
432 
(31) 
784 
(20) 
Klebsiella 
pneumoniae 
8783 
(15) 
1785 
(15) 
2065 
(15) 
2054 
(21) 
1653 
(11) 
456 
(13) 
42 (11) 
185 
(13) 
514 
(13) 
P. aeruginosa 
7273 
(12) 
650 
(5.5) 
723 
(5.3) 
2632 
(26.2) 
1951 
(12.8) 
472 
(13.4) 
43 
(11) 
144 
(10.2) 
655 
(16.6) 
A. baumannii 
3869 
(6.4) 
535 
(4.5) 
96 
(0.7) 
1539 
(15.3) 
980 
(6.4) 
369 
(10.5) 
30 
(7.7) 
51 
(3.6) 
268 
(6.8) 
 
S. aureus 
7282 
(12) 
1046 
(8.9) 
98 
(0.7) 
597 
(5.9) 
4214 
(27.7) 
572 
(16.3) 
25 
(6.4) 
94 
(6.7) 
635 
(16.1) 
MRSA 
2844 
(4.7) 
423 
(3.6) 
38 
(0.3) 
228 
(2.3) 
1716 
(11.3) 
191 
(5.4) 
16 
(4.1) 
37 
(2.6) 
195 
(4.9) 
E. faecalis 
1781 
(2.9) 
217 
(1.8) 
676 
(4.9) 
4 
(0) 
459 
(3) 
235 
(6.7) 
8 
(2.1) 
42 
(3) 
138 
(3.5) 
E. faecium 
1216 
(2) 
415 
(3.5) 
399 
(2.9) 
5 
(0) 
201 
(1.3) 
62 
(1.8) 
16 
(4.1) 
52 
(3.7) 
61 
(1.5) 
Enterobacter 
cloacae 
920 
(1.5) 
203 
(1.7) 
142 
(1) 
96 
(1) 
277 
(1.8) 
103 
(2.9) 
6 
(1.5) 
21 
(1.5) 
67 
(1.7) 
Staphylococcus 
haemolyticus 
798 
(1.3) 
444 
(3.8) 
7 
(0.1) 
9 
(0.1) 
214 
(1.4) 
68 
(1.9) 
9 
(2.3) 
11 
(0.8) 
36 
(0.9) 
Staphylococcus 
epidermidis 
760 
(1.3) 
465 
(3.9) 
8 
(0.1) 
3 
(0) 
182 
(1.2) 
26 
(0.7) 
26 
(6.7) 
14 
(1) 
36 
(0.9) 
S.hominis 
402 
(0.66) 
329 
(2.8) 
1 
(0) 
2 
(0.02) 
38 
(0.25) 
10 
(0.28) 
7 
(1.8) 
7 
(0.5) 
8 
(0.2) 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and Superficial Tissue. 
5. 
DI (Deep Infection) includes: Abscess aspirate, Pus aspirate, Deep Biopsy and Deep Tissue. 
6. 
CSF (Cerebrospinal fluid)

<<<PAGE 190>>>
185 
 
Table 3: Isolation of Salmonella from different sample types 
Isolate 
Culture positive
Blood 
n=13344 (%) 
Faeces 
n=585 (%) 
Others 
n=57437 (%) 
Salmonella Typhi 
576 
(4.3)
98 
(16.8)
15 
(0)
Salmonella 
Paratyphi A
124 
(0.9)
0 
(0)
5 
(0)
Total Salmonella 
741 
(5.6)
465 
(79.5)
57407 
(99.9)
 
Table 4: Isolation rates of different fungi from different specimens 
Isolate 
Total 
n=71366
Blood 
n=13344
Urine 
n=16576
LRT 
n=11361 
SI 
n=18492
DI 
n=3963 
Genital 
n=187
Fungal isolates 
1428 
(2) 
932 
(6.98) 
146 
(0.88) 
28 
(0.2) 
30 
(0.16) 
9 
(0.22) 
186 
(99.46) 
Yeasts 
1272 
(1.78) 
809 
(6.06) 
146 
(0.88) 
7 
(0.1) 
29 
(0.15) 
8 
(0.20) 
186 
(99.46) 
-Candida 
1253 
(1.75) 
793 
(5.94) 
146 
(0.88) 
6 
(0.1) 
28 
(0.15) 
8 
(0.20) 
186 
(99.46) 
Candida albicans 
395 
(0.55) 
149 
(1.11) 
57 
(0.34) 
3 
(0) 
13 
(0.07) 
3 
(0.07) 
140 
(74.86) 
Candida tropicalis 
384 
(0.53) 
261 
(1.95) 
68 
(0.41) 
1 
(0) 
7 
(0) 
2 
(0.05) 
17 
(9.09) 
Candida glabrata 
143 
(0.2) 
83 
(0.62) 
12 
(0.07) 
0 
(0) 
5 
(0) 
2 
(0.05) 
22 
(11.76) 
Candida utilis 
151 
(0.21) 
150 
(1.12) 
1 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
Candida 
parapsilosis
102 
(0.14) 
94 
(0.70) 
3 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
1 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
1 
(0.53) 
Candida krusei 
35 
(0.04) 
22 
(0.16) 
2 
(0) 
1 
(0) 
1 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
6 
(3.21) 
Candida auris 
25 
(0.03) 
20 
(0.15) 
3 
(0) 
1 
(0) 
1 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
0 
(0) 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue. 
4. 
DI (Deep Infection) includes: Abscess aspirate, Pus aspirate, Deep Biopsy and Deep Tissue.

<<<PAGE 191>>>
186 
 
Susceptibility patterns of key pathogens, 2018 
Table 5: Susceptible percentages of Salmonella isolates 
(If number of isolates of particular species ≥ 20). 
 
AMA
Blood 
 
Salmonella Typhi 
n=689
Salmonella Paratyphi A
n=129
Ampicillin
92.7 
96.9 
Azithromycin
97.2 
- 
Cefixime
98.6 
100 
Ceftriaxone
98.1 
97.7 
Chloramphenicol
95.8 
99.2 
Ciprofloxacin
12.9 
0.9 
Levofloxacin
31.8 
- 
Pefloxacin
28.6 
- 
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
94.6 
100 
 
 
Table 6: Susceptible percentages of Acinetobacter baumannii isolated from different 
specimen (except faeces). 
 
AMA 
All 
Specimens
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
DI 
CSF 
Urine 
n=4526 
n=694
n=1778
n=1105
n=385
n=49
n=125
Amikacin
23.1 
28.2 
17.5 
23.4 
21.6 
30 
49.6 
Cefepime
13.2 
18.1 
8.7 
13.2 
12.4 
20.4 
40.8 
Ceftazidime
13.9 
17.6 
10.1 
14.2 
11.7 
9.8 
42.2 
Imipenem
18.2 
24.9 
10.8 
21.6 
16.2 
24.5 
52.1 
Levofloxacin
23.8 
28.9 
14.1 
31.7 
28.6 
26.7 
48.2 
Meropenem
22.9 
29.7 
14.7 
28.9 
17.9 
26.7 
57 
Minocycline
64.3 
60.9 
56.8 
74.9 
77.1 
60.9 
69.7 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam
17 
23.6 
10.5 
17.9 
15.4 
24.5 
54.1

<<<PAGE 192>>>
187 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, 
Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue. 
5. 
DI (Deep Infection) includes: Abscess aspirate, Pus aspirate, Deep Biopsy and Deep Tissue. 
6. 
CSF (Cerebrospinal fluid) 
Table 7: Susceptible percentages of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolated from different 
specimen (except faeces). 
AMA 
All 
Specimen 
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
DI 
CSF 
Urine 
n=8856 
n=776
n=2922
n=2573
n=561
n=47
n=922
Amikacin
68.8 
63.3 
77.9 
66.7 
69.8 
42.9 
51.7 
Cefepime
63.5 
65 
72.5 
59.9 
64.8 
31.9 
44.3 
Ceftazidime
65.9 
70.4 
73.5 
62.4 
68.9 
34 
46.1 
Ciprofloxacin
60 
57.8 
68.2 
59.5 
60.6 
31.1 
41.9 
Colistin
91.5 
92.5 
93.1 
86.2 
98.4 
- 
93.1 
Gentamicin
63.1 
61.4 
71.7 
62.9 
63.6 
43.6 
46.1 
Imipenem
67.2 
70.6 
71.7 
67.9 
70.5 
47.6 
51.2 
Levofloxacin
58.4 
58.5 
69.5 
54.9 
60.8 
31.9 
37.4 
Meropenem
69.2 
72.9 
72.1 
70.3 
73.1 
41.3 
50.4 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam
71 
72.4 
75 
70.3 
73.6 
38.3 
55.6 
Tobramycin
68 
59 
80.2 
64 
71.6 
42.9 
43.3 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue. 
4. 
DI (Deep Infection) includes: Abscess aspirate, Pus aspirate, Deep Biopsy and Deep Tissue. 
5. 
CSF (Cerebrospinal fluid)

<<<PAGE 193>>>
188 
 
Table 8: Susceptible percentages for Escherichia coli isolated from different specimen 
 
AMA 
All 
Specime
ns 
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
SS 
CSF 
Urine 
n=18303 
n=2335
n=880
n=3460
n=484
n=44
n=9391
Amikacin
81.1 
81.3 
76.8 
78 
80.1 
70.7 
83 
Cefazolin
28 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
28 
Cefotaxime
20.9 
19.1 
12.6 
15 
11.3 
15.4 
25 
Ceftazidime
23.1 
23.3 
18.8 
22.7 
25.5 
25.7 
- 
Ciprofloxacin
25.2 
24.4 
19.1 
21.1 
22.7 
16.3 
27.9 
Colistin
98.5 
99.5 
97.8 
98.6 
100 
- 
98.1 
Ertapenem
68.6 
69.2 
56.6 
63.5 
64.5 
43.6 
71.5 
Fosfomycin
88.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
88.1 
Imipenem
73 
80.6 
71.2 
69.7 
80.5 
81.4 
73.7 
Levofloxacin
23.4 
12 
16.6 
17.2 
18.3 
17.4 
26.6 
Meropenem
70.4 
76.7 
59.7 
63.3 
75.3 
59.1 
71.6 
Nitrofurantoin
85.9 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
86 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam
60 
59.6 
44.9 
52.1 
54.1 
57.1 
66.2 
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
39.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
39.4 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, 
Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue. 
5. 
CSF (Cerebrospinal fluid)

<<<PAGE 194>>>
189 
 
Table 9: Susceptible percentages for Klebsiella pneumoniae isolated from different 
specimen 
 
AMA 
All 
Specimens
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
SS 
CSF 
Urine 
n=10387
n=1965
n=2404
n=2134
n=209
n=46
n=2446
Amikacin
52.9 
43.9 
53 
51.8 
44.4 
34.1 
60.4 
Cefazolin
28.2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
28.2 
Cefotaxime
23.2 
18.6 
24.3 
21.6 
23 
2.3 
27 
Ceftazidime
26.7 
20.9 
31.9 
25.8 
23.1 
7.3 
- 
Ciprofloxacin
36.2 
30.4 
40.7 
35 
30 
22.2 
37.7 
Colistin
91.5 
90.6 
93.2 
95 
95.8 
- 
89.9 
Ertapenem
49.2 
36.8 
51.1 
51.3 
40.1 
30.2 
52.6 
Imipenem
54 
47.4 
54.7 
54.2 
49.5 
54.3 
60.7 
Levofloxacin
30.9 
23.8 
28.3 
30.7 
21.9 
15.4 
36.5 
Meropenem
51.5 
42.4 
53.1 
53.4 
45 
39.5 
54.7 
Nitrofurantoin
37.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
37.5 
Piperacillin-
tazobactam
41.1 
33.2 
42.7 
40.2 
36.1 
15.2 
46.6 
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
40 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
40 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, 
Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue. 
5. 
CSF (Cerebrospinal fluid)

<<<PAGE 195>>>
190 
 
Table 10: Susceptible percentages for Enterobacter cloacae isolated from different specimen 
 
AMA 
All 
Specimens 
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
SS 
Urine 
n=1037
n=216
n=103
n=333
n=23
n=171
Amikacin
78.3 
82.4 
91.3 
74.3 
82.6 
73.8 
Cefotaxime
36.6 
24 
46 
43.6 
- 
35.3 
Ceftazidime
42.8 
35.9 
37 
45.9 
- 
- 
Ciprofloxacin
63.5 
67 
77.3 
62 
78.3 
54.2 
Colistin
92.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
90 
Ertapenem
75.9 
71.6 
90 
78.2 
90 
70.6 
Imipenem
77.9 
79.4 
88.3 
76.6 
82.6 
76.6 
Levofloxacin
58.4 
54.5 
82.6 
56.3 
- 
56.6 
Meropenem
76.2 
76.7 
87.2 
74.3 
90.9 
72.9 
Nitrofurantoin
53.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
53.3 
Piperacillin-tazobactam
66 
68.1 
73.7 
63.9 
77.3 
66.5 
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
57.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
57.1 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, 
Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue.

<<<PAGE 196>>>
191 
 
Table 11: Susceptible percentages for Staphylococcus aureus isolated from different 
specimen 
 
AMA 
All 
Specime
ns 
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
SS 
CSF 
Urine 
n=8424 
n=1217 
n=681 
n=4727 
n=112 
n=29 
n=203 
Cefoxitin
61.5 
58.2 
62.8 
60.4 
64.2 
31 
55.9 
Ciprofloxacin
18.6 
21.1 
15.5 
16.9 
27.6 
32 
30.7 
Clindamycin
76.1 
74.8 
69.8 
76.4 
78.7 
74.1 
71.4 
Erythromycin
44.4 
41.3 
40.4 
45.1 
47.2 
46.2 
37.7 
Linezolid
98.8 
98 
98.9 
99 
100 
100 
97.8 
Mupirocin High Level
97.7 
96.6 
98.9 
98.3 
98.2 
- 
94.5 
Oxacillin
55 
58.4 
52.3 
51 
51.6 
- 
74.4 
Penicillin
6.2 
8.5 
10.1 
4.7 
7 
- 
7.4 
Teicoplanin
97.7 
96.2 
98.1 
98 
100 
95.7 
96.5 
Tetracycline
88.6 
88.6 
85.3 
89.4 
93.5 
90.5 
77.3 
Tigecycline
99.5 
100 
97.6 
99.5 
100 
- 
100 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
62.7 
65.8 
66.5 
61.4 
61.2 
70.8 
63.2 
Vancomycin
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
- 
100 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, 
Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue. 
5. 
CSF (Cerebrospinal fluid)

<<<PAGE 197>>>
192 
 
Table 12: Susceptible percentages for Methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) 
isolated from different specimen 
 
AMA 
All 
Specimens
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
SS 
Urine 
n=5009 
n=5009 
n=5009 
n=5009 
n=5009 
n=5009 
Cefoxitin
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
Ciprofloxacin
24.3 
26.8 
20.8 
22.7 
38.1 
36.9 
Clindamycin
86.2 
84.4 
84.4 
86.3 
84.4 
87.5 
Erythromycin
56.9 
57 
53.4 
57.1 
56.5 
55.2 
Linezolid
99.5 
98.8 
99.5 
99.6 
100 
100 
Mupirocin High Level
98.9 
99.6 
98.5 
99 
97.3 
94.6 
Oxacillin
100 
100 
100 
100 
- 
100 
Penicillin
10.7 
14.5 
17.8 
8.5 
14.8 
13.3 
Teicoplanin
98.9 
98.8 
98.9 
99.1 
100 
97.9 
Tetracycline
92.1 
92.5 
91.1 
92 
96.2 
90.7 
Tigecycline
100 
100 
100 
100 
- 
- 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
67.1 
73.4 
70.1 
64 
67.2 
74.8 
Vancomycin
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, 
Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue.

<<<PAGE 198>>>
193 
 
Table 13: Susceptible percentages for Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) 
isolated from different specimen 
 
AMA 
All 
Specime
ns
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
SS 
Urine 
n=3352
n=3352 
n=3352 
n=3352 
n=3352 
n=3352 
Cefoxitin
0.2 
0 
0 
0.2 
2.6 
0 
Ciprofloxacin
10.1 
14.1 
7.8 
8.8 
11.9 
23 
Clindamycin
61.4 
61.8 
48.5 
62.9 
70.5 
52.9 
Erythromycin
25.6 
21.5 
19.9 
27.8 
34.1 
16.7 
Linezolid
97.9 
96.9 
98 
98.1 
100 
95.4 
Mupirocin High Level
95.4 
91.6 
100 
97 
- 
94.4 
Oxacillin
2.6 
3.7 
0 
1.9 
- 
- 
Penicillin
1.3 
1.6 
2 
1 
0 
0 
Teicoplanin
96.3 
93.3 
97.2 
96.9 
100 
94.7 
Tetracycline
83.6 
83.3 
76.6 
85.9 
90 
62.7 
Tigecycline
98.7 
100 
94.5 
99 
- 
- 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
56.3 
55.1 
60.7 
57.9 
52.5 
48.2 
Vancomycin
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
- 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, 
Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue.

<<<PAGE 199>>>
194 
 
 
Table 14: Susceptible percentages for CoNS isolated from different specimen 
 
AMA 
All 
Specime
ns 
Blood 
LRT 
SI 
SS 
CSF 
Urine 
n=3915 
n=2342 
n=23 
n=904 
n=56 
n=66 
n=93 
Cefoxitin
27.5 
25.5 
30 
29.3 
48.1 
35.5 
27.8 
Ciprofloxacin
38 
35.2 
31.8 
42.8 
49.1 
50.8 
38.5 
Clindamycin
54.3 
51.6 
40.9 
57.7 
68.5 
64.6 
56.1 
Erythromycin
22.1 
19.3 
10 
24.4 
36.4 
35.4 
27.2 
Linezolid
97.4 
97.7 
95.7 
97.9 
100 
98.5 
96.7 
Penicillin
9.3 
9.9 
- 
7.2 
25.6 
26.2 
2.2 
Teicoplanin
94.5 
93.6 
100 
96 
96.1 
98.5 
96.6 
Tetracycline
79.5 
80.3 
- 
80.6 
88.2 
87.7 
62.6 
Tigecycline
98.3 
99.1 
- 
95.2 
- 
- 
- 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
45.6 
42.6 
- 
47.3 
67.3 
47.5 
61.9 
Vancomycin
100 
100 
- 
100 
100 
- 
100 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
LRT (Lower Respiratory Tract) includes: BAL, Sputum, Lung aspirate, Endotracheal aspirate (ETA) and Lobectomy 
tissue (Lung tissue). 
3. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, Pancreatic drain fluid, 
Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
4. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, Superficial Biopsy and 
Superficial Tissue. 
5. 
CSF (Cerebrospinal fluid)

<<<PAGE 200>>>
195 
 
 
 
Table 15: Susceptible percentages for Enterococcus faecalis isolated from different 
specimen 
 
AMA 
All Specimens
Blood
SI 
SS 
Urine 
n=1990 
n=261
n=506
n=44
n=763
Ampicillin
73.7 
67.3 
71.5 
53.5 
78.6 
Ciprofloxacin
13.4 
- 
- 
- 
13.2 
Fosfomycin
87.5 
- 
- 
- 
87.5 
Gentamicin HL
52.1 
46.6 
53.1 
53.5 
54.2 
Linezolid
98.3 
97.1 
99 
100 
98.5 
Nitrofurantoin
93 
- 
- 
- 
93 
Teicoplanin
95.9 
89.9 
96 
93.2 
97.6 
Vancomycin
96.1 
93.4 
95.4 
93.2 
97.5 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, 
Pancreatic drain fluid, Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid. 
3. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, 
Superficial Biopsy and Superficial Tissue. 
 
Table 16: Susceptible percentages for Enterococcus faecium isolated from different 
specimen 
 
AMA 
All Specimens
Blood
SI 
SS 
Urine
n=1424 
n=478 
n=218
n=61
n=501 
Ampicillin
18.1 
20.8 
18.6 
14 
16.7 
Ciprofloxacin
6.1 
- 
- 
- 
6.1 
Gentamicin HL
29.5 
25.3 
28 
18.2 
32.1 
Linezolid
96 
97.1 
94.8 
96.7 
94.4 
Nitrofurantoin
52.5 
- 
- 
- 
52.5 
Teicoplanin
78.9 
74.7 
76.1 
82 
82.2 
Vancomycin
78.1 
75 
73.4 
82 
81.3 
 
Notes: 
1. 
Blood includes: Blood-central catheter, Blood-peripheral and Peripheral catheter-blood. 
2. 
SS (Sterile sites) includes: Fluid from sterile spaces, Abdominal fluid, Intracostal tube fluid, 
Pancreatic drain fluid, Pericardial fluid, Peritoneal fluid and Pleural fluid.

<<<PAGE 201>>>
196 
 
3. 
SI (Superficial Infection) includes: SST (Skin & Soft Tissue), Pus/exudate, Wound swab, 
Superficial Biopsy and Superficial Tissue. 
Table 17: Susceptible percentages of Candida spp. isolated from all specimen 
 
AMA
All Specimens
 
Candida 
albicans 
n=395
Candida 
auris 
n=25
Candida 
glabrata 
n=143
Candida 
krusei 
n=35
Candida 
parapsilosis 
n=102
Candida 
tropicalis 
n=384
Candida 
utilis 
n=151
Anidulafungin
99.2 
- 
84.9 
100 
100 
96.8 
98 
Caspofungin
94.6 
- 
50.8 
57.7 
100 
94.7 
100 
Fluconazole
92.4 
0 
70.4 
22.9 
82.4 
94.8 
98.7 
Micafungin
100 
- 
- 
- 
96.6 
98.8 
- 
Voriconazole
93.1 
- 
97.1 
97.1 
96.9 
98.4 
100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 18: Susceptible percentages of Candida spp. isolated from blood specimen. 
 
AMA
 
Candida 
albicans 
n=149
Candida 
glabrata 
n=83
Candida 
krusei 
n=22
Candida 
parapsilosis 
n=94
Candida 
tropicalis 
n=261
Candida 
utilis 
n=150
Anidulafungin
98.9 
84.4 
- 
100 
96.7 
98 
Caspofungin
95.1 
48.5 
60 
100 
94.9 
100 
Fluconazole
98.7 
62.2 
22.7 
81.9 
95.4 
98.7 
Micafungin
100 
- 
- 
96.2 
100 
- 
Voriconazole
99.3 
96.3 
100 
96.7 
98.4 
100

<<<PAGE 202>>>
197 
 
 
 
Table 19: Susceptible percentages of Candida spp. isolated from urine specimen. 
 
AMA
 
Candida albicans
n=57
Candida tropicalis
n=68
Fluconazole
93 
98.5 
Voriconazole
96.4 
100 
 
 
 
 
Table 20: Susceptible percentages of Candida spp. isolated from genital specimen. 
 
AMA
 
Candida albicans
n=140
Candida glabrata
n=22
Fluconazole
83.6 
90.9 
Voriconazole
83.6 
100

<<<PAGE 203>>>
198 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
Index of Tables 
S. No 
Table 
number 
Description 
1 
2.1 
Antimicrobial choice for disease conditions 
2 
2.2 
Standard doses of antimicrobials 
3 
2.3 
ACT regimens as per body weight 
4 
2.4 
Primaquine regimens as per body weight 
5 
2.5 
Antimicrobials dosage as per chemoprophylaxis 
6 
2.6 
Standard doses of antimicrobials 
 
7 
2.7 
Treatment guideline for Scrub typhus 
8 
3.1 
Antimicrobial choice for disease conditions 
9 
3.2 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
10 
4.1 
Antimicrobial therapy in URTI 
11 
4.2 
Choice of empiric antimicrobial therapy in adult CAP 
12 
4.3 
Antimicrobial therapy for Pediatric CAP 
13 
4.4 
Drug doses, duration and route 
14 
5.1 
Antibiotics regimen for various IAIs 
15 
5.2 
Antibiotics regimen for SBP 
16 
5.3 
Types of Acute Diarrhea 
17 
5.4 
Antibiotic Treatment for Diarrhea 
18 
6.1 
Antibiotics guidelines for skin and soft-tissue infections (SSTIs) 
19 
6.2 
LRINEC (Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis) Score (>6 favours 
NF):
20 
6.3 
Clinical signs which favour NF>cellulitis 
21 
6.4 
Antibiotics guidelines for deep neck space infections 
22 
6.5 
Standard doses of antimicrobials for SSTIs 
23 
6.6 
Standard doses of antimicrobials for Deep neck space infections 
24 
7.1 
Classification of Osteomyelitis 
25 
7.2 
Likely organisms after orthopaedic implant surgery/ PJI based on the interval 
between surgery and infection 
26 
7.3 
Pathogen-specific Antibiotics for B&J Infections

<<<PAGE 204>>>
199 
 
27 
7.4 
Directed Oral Antibiotic Options for Treatment of B&J Infections 
28 
7.5 
Etiology of osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, prosthetic and implant-associated 
infections 
29 
7.6 
Likely etiology of B&J Infections based on Host and Environment 
30 
7.7 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
31 
8.1 
Causes of AFE with pointers to diagnosis and recommended tests 
32 
8.2 
Differentiation of cause of AFE based on CSF analysis 
33 
8.3 
Etiology and empiric therapy of community acquired acute bacterial meningitis 
34 
8.4 
Treatment of health care associated meningitis and ventriculitis 
35 
8.5 
Etiology and empiric therapy for brain abscess 
36 
8.6 
Doses of drugs used in CNS infections 
37 
8.7 
Doses of drugs to be given by the intrathecal/ intraventricular route (CSF shunt 
infections) 
38 
9.1 
Clinical features and investigations for different UTI syndromes 
39 
9.2 
Empiric treatment regimens for urinary tract infections, (when culture results are 
awaited) 
40 
9.3 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
41 
9.4 
Antimicrobial Susceptibility of Enterobacteriaceae isolates from urine 
42 
10.1 
Classification of Surgical wound and their antimicrobial prophylaxis 
43 
10.2 
Operations and likely Surgical Site Infection (SSI) pathogens 
44 
10.3 
Antibiotics for treatment of incisional surgical site infections 
45 
10.4 
Antibiotics for treatment of CLABSI 
46 
10.5 
CLABSI due to Gram positive cocci and suggested antibiotics 
47 
10.6 
CLABSI due to Gram negative bacilli and suggested antibiotics 
48 
10.7 
CLABSI due to to pathogenic yeasts and suggested antibiotics 
49 
10.8 
Antimicrobials guidelines for HAP/VAP 
50 
10.9 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
51 
10.10 
Sensitivity and specificity of the diagnostic methods for CDI 
52 
10.11 
Recommendations for the treatment of Clostridium difficile infection in adults 
53 
10.12 
Antimicrobials guidelines for CA-UTI 
54 
11.1 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis and surveillance in HSCT patients 
55 
11.2 
Antimicrobial therapy in the bone marrow transplant setting 
56 
11.3 
Central nervous system infections 
57 
11.4 
Respiratory tract infections

<<<PAGE 205>>>
200 
 
 
 
 
58 
11.5 
Gastrointestinal and intra-abdominal infections 
59 
11.6 
Skin and soft tissue infections 
60 
11.7 
Urinary tract infections 
61 
11.8 
Bone and joint infections 
62 
11.9 
Severe sepsis and septic shock of unknown source 
63 
11.10 
Post-operative infections following solid organ transplant 
64 
11.11 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for central nervous system infections 
65 
11.12 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for respiratory tract infections 
66 
11.13 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for gastrointestinal and intra-abdominal 
infections
67 
11.14 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for skin and soft tissue infections 
68 
11.15 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for urinary tract infections 
69 
11.16 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for urinary tract infections 
70 
11.17 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for severe sepsis and septic shock of 
unknown source 
71 
11.18 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents for Post-operative infections following 
solid organ transplant 
72 
12.1 
Summarizing use of antimicrobial agents (AMA) in Obstetrics & Gynaecology 
73 
12.2 
Standard doses of antimicrobial agents 
74 
13.1 
Microbiology profile of Infective endocarditis 
75 
13.2 
Modified Duke’s Criteria for the Diagnosis of IE 
76 
13.3 
Empirical antibiotic therapy for IE (pending blood culture results) 
77 
13.4 
Antibiotic therapy for native valve IE 
78 
13.5 
Antibiotic therapy for due to Staphylococcus aureus 
79 
13.6 
IE caused by Coagulase-Negative Staphylococci 
80 
13.7 
Antibiotic therapy for due to Enterococcus spp 
81 
13.8 
Indication for surgery in patient with associated condition 
82 
14.1 
Duration, Drug Interaction, Dosage and Administration 
83 
14.2 
Duration, Drug Interaction, Dosage and Administration for Antifungal Agents

<<<PAGE 206>>>
201 
 
Editing and compilation team: 
 
 Dr. R.R.Gangakhedkar 
 Head and Scientist G, 
 Division of Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases (ECD), 
 Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR-Hq) 
 New Delhi 
 
 Dr Kamini Walia 
 
Scientist F, 
 
Program Officer Antimicrobial Resistance, 
 Division of Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases (ECD), 
 Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR-Hq) 
 New Delhi 
 
Dr. Sumit Aggarwal 
Scientist C, 
 Division of Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases (ECD), 
 Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR-Hq) 
 New Delhi 
 
Dr. Madhumathi J 
Scientist C, 
 Division of Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases (ECD), 
 Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR-Hq) 
 New Delhi 
 
Dr. Sonam Vijay 
Scientist C, 
 Division of Epidemiology and Communicable Diseases (ECD), 
 Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR-Hq) 
New Delhi
