<<<PAGE 1>>>
Drug Indication

Artesunate is indicated for the initial treatment of severe malaria in adult and pediatric patients.

<<<PAGE 2>>>
Therapeutic Uses

Artesunate Rectal Capsules is indicated for the initial management of acute malaria in patients who cannot take medication by mouth and for whom parenteral treatment is not available.

To counter the threat of resistance of P. falciparum to monotherapies, and to improve treatment outcome, combinations of antimalarials are now recommended by WHO for the treatment of falciparum malaria. The following ACTs are currently recommended (alphabetical order): AS+AQ artesunate + amodiaquine combination, AS+MQ artesunate + mefloquine combination, AS+SP artesunate + sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine combination.

Artemisinin and its derivatives (artesunate, artemether, artemotil, dihydroartemisinin) produce rapid clearance of parasitaemia and rapid resolution of symptoms. They reduce parasite numbers by a factor of approximately 10,000 in each asexual cycle, which is more than other current antimalarials (which reduce parasite numbers 100- to 1000-fold per cycle). Artemisinin and its derivatives are eliminated rapidly. When given in combination with rapidly eliminated compounds (tetracyclines, clindamycin), a 7-day course of treatment with an artemisinin compound is required; but when given in combination with slowly eliminated antimalarials, shorter courses of treatment (3 days) are effective. The evidence of their superiority in comparison to monotherapies has been clearly documented.

For more Therapeutic Uses (Complete) data for ARTESUNIC ACID (14 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Drug Warnings

Artemisinin congeners should not be given to patients with a previous history of an allergic reaction following their consumption or if an urticarial rash develops during treatment. Patient with a history of hypersensitivity reaction to one of the artemsinins should be advised not to take any of the derivatives again.

Artesunate rectal capsules have not been evaluated as sole therapy for malaria; consequently all patient who are initially treated with artesunate rectal capsules should be promptly referred and evaluated at the nearest health care facility able to provide a full curative course of treatment for malaria.

Adverse events described /following artesunate/ included bitter taste, mild pain at the injection site, bradycardia, paroxysmal ventricular premature beat, incomplete right bundle branch block, first-degree atrio-ventricular block, and urticaria.

... The most commonly reported adverse events (in the order of <1%) to be mild gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain) events.

For more Drug Warnings (Complete) data for ARTESUNIC ACID (25 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

<<<PAGE 4>>>
Pharmacodynamics

Artesunate is an artemisinin derivative that is metabolized to DHA, which generates free radicals to inhibit normal function of _Plasmodium_ parasites. It has a short duration of action due to its short half life, and a moderate therapeutic index. Patients should be counselled regarding the risk of post treatment hemolytic anemia and hypersenstivity.

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Absorption, Distribution and Excretion

The Cmax of artesunate is 3.3µg/mL while the Cmax of the active metabolite DHA is 3.1µg/mL. The AUC of artesunate is 0.7µg\*h/mL while the AUC of DHA is 3.5µg\*h/mL. After intravenous artesunate, DHA has a Tmax of 0.5-15 minutes in adult patients and 21-64 minutes in pediatric patients. Intramuscular artesunate has a Tmax of 8-12 minutes. Infants less than 6 months old will have a higher AUC due to an undeveloped UGT metabolic pathway.

The main route of elimination in humans is unknown. In rats, a dose of artesunate is 56.1% eliminated in the urine and 38.5% in the feces.

The volume of distribution of artesunate is 68.5L while the volume of distribution of DHA is 59.7L.

The clearance of artesunate is 180L/h while the clearance of DHA is 32.3L/h.

Following administration to humans, artesunate is rapidly hydrolyzed to its principal active metabolite, dihydroartemisinin. The pharmacokinetics of artesunate are characterized by marked inter-subject variability, differing significantly between healthy volunteers and infected patients, and among patients with different disease severity.

The pharmacokinetic of artesunate and dihydroartemisin are characterized by marked inter-subject variability. The pharmacokinetic parameters of artesunate and dihydroartemisinin differ significantly between healthy volunteers and infected patients, and among patients with different disease severity. Pharmacokinetic data from unbound plasma concentrations of artesunate or dihydroartemisinin should be interpreted with caution because the drug accumulates selectively in parasitized RBC's In in vitro experiments, accumulation of dihydroartemisinin in infected RBC's is in concentrations approximately 300-fold higher than those in plasma .

The pharmacokinetics of oral dihydroartemisinin (DHA) following the dose of 2 and 4 mg/ kg body weight dihydroartemisinin and 4 mg/kg body weight oral artesunate (AS) were investigated in 20 healthy Thai volunteers (10 males, 10 females). All formulations were generally well tolerated. Oral DHA was rapidly absorbed from gastrointestinal tract with marked inter-individual variation. The pharmacokinetics of DHA following the two dose levels were similar and linearity in its kinetics was observed. Based on the model-independent pharmacokinetic analysis, median (95% CI) values for Cmax of 181 (120-306) and 360 (181-658) ng/ml were achieved at 1.5 hours following 2 and 4 mg/kg body weight dose, respectively. The corresponding values for AUC0-infinity, t1/2z, CL/f and Vz/f were 377 (199-1,128) vs 907 (324-2,289) ng.hr/mL, 0.96 (0.70-1.81) vs 1.2 (0.75-1.44) hours, 7.7 (4.3-12.3) vs 6.6 (3.1-10.1) L/kg, and 90.5 (28.6-178.2) vs 6.6 (3.1-10.1) mL/min/kg, respectively (2 vs 4 mg/kg dose). Oral AS was rapidly biotransformed to DHA, which was detectable in plasma as early as 15 minutes of AS dosing. Following 4 mg/kg dose, median (95% CI) value for Cmax of 519 (236-284) ng/mL was achieved at 0.7 (0.25-1.5) hours. AUC0-infinity, and t1/2z were 657 (362-2,079) ng.hr/mL, 0.74 (0.34-1.42) hours, respectively. Cmax of DHA following oral AS were significantly higher, but total systemic exposure was greater following oral DHA at the same dose level (4 mg/kg body weight). There was no significant sex difference in pharmacokinetics of DHA

The aims of this study were to determine the pharmacokinetic parameters of a single dose of 200 mg oral and rectal artesunate in healthy volunteers, and to suggest a rational dosage regimen for rectal administration. The study design was a randomized open cross-over study of 12 healthy volunteers... Pharmacokinetic parameters were derived from the main metabolite alpha-dihydroartemisinin data due to the rapid disappearance of artesunate from the plasma. Dihydroartemisinin following oral administration of artesunate had a significantly higher AUC(0-infinity) (P<0.05 95% confidence interval (CI) -1168.73, -667.61 ng x hr/mL(-1)) and Cmax (P<0.05; 95% CI -419.73, -171.44 ng/mL(-1)), and had shorter tmax (P<0.05; 95% CI -0.97, -0.10 hr) than that following rectal artesunate. There was no statistically significant difference in the elimination half-life between both routes of administration (P>0.05; 95% CI -0.14, 0.53 hr). The relative bioavailability of rectal artesunate was [mean (coefficient of variation %) 54.9 (24.8%) %].

For more Absorption, Distribution and Excretion (Complete) data for ARTESUNIC ACID (8 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

A 2025 systematic review states that Artesunate has superior water solubility, stability, and oral bioavailabilty compared to its parent compound (Artemisinin).

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Metabolism/Metabolites

Artesunate is rapidly metabolized to dihydroartemisinin (DHA) by plasma esterases. DHA is glucuronidated by UGT1A9 and UGT2B7 to DHA-glucuronide. DHA-glucuronide can undergo a minor metabolic pathway to for a furano acetate derivative of DHA-glucuronide. CYP2A6 may minorly contribute to the metabolism of artesunate.

Following administration to humans, artesunate is rapidly hydrolyzed to its principle active metabolite, dihydroartemisinin. Data from in vitro studies with human liver microsomes and from clinical studies suggest that DHA-glucoronide (10-position) is the principal Phase II metabolite of DHA and that uridine diphosphate glucuronyl transferase isoforms 1A1, 1A8-9, or 2B7 may be the main conjugating enzyme.

Artemisinin is completely and rapidly absorbed after oral administration in rats. However, a very low plasma level was obtained even after a dose of 300 mg/kg. Liver was found to be the chief site of inactivation. When artemisinin was given i.m., significant and more persistent plasma levels were detected. Artemisinin was shown to pass the blood-brain and blood-placenta barriers after i.v. injection. Very little unchanged artemisinin was found in the urine or feces in 48 hours regardless of the route of administration. Metabolites identified after administration to humans include deoxyartemisinin, deoxydihydroartemisinin, and 9,10-dihydroxydeoxyartemisinin.

Artesunate has known human metabolites that include (1S,4S,5R,8S,9R,10R,12R,13R)-1,5,9-Trimethyl-11,14,15,16-tetraoxatetracyclo[10.3.1.04,13.08,13]hexadecan-10-ol.

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Biological Half-Life

The elimination half life of artesunate is 0.3h with a range of 0.1-1.8h. The elimination half life of DHA is 1.3h with a range of 0.9-2.9h. Half life after intramuscular administration is 48 min in children and 41 min in adults.

In volunteer studies, artsunate was cleared very rapidly (within minutes) by biotransformation to dihydroartemisinin, which was eliminated by with a half-life of approximately 45 minutes.

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Mechanism of Action

Artesunate is metabolized to the active DHA. the endoperoxide bridge of DHA reacts with heme, generating free radicals which inhibit protein and nucleic acid synthesis of the _Plasmodium_ parasites during all erythrocytic stages. Reactions with these free radicals can also lead to alkylation of parasitic proteins such as a calcium adenosine triphosphatase and EXP1, a glutathione S-transferase.

Two theories have been put forward for the mode of antimalarial action of the artemisinin antimalarials, in accodance with the known properties of peroxides with medicinal activity. The first assumes that the artemisinins must be activated by contact with either reduced haem (ferrous haem, Fe(ll)PPIX) or non-haem ferrous iron (exogenous iron), causing cleavage of the peroxide to generate oxygen-centered radicals (alkoxy radicals') which are the presumed to be converted into carbon-centered radicals by transfer of proximate hydrogen atoms from the periphery of the peroxide molecule. These carbon-centered radicals are then thought to alkylate sensitive, yet unspecified, biomolecules in the parasite. A second theory argues for a process in which the intact artemisinin binds to a site within a vital protein in the parasite. The act of binding causes the peroxide to be converted to hydroperoxide or similar open peroxide, which in accordance with known properties of such compounds, generates one or more active chemical entities, either oxidizing agents or oxygen transfer agents per se, or oxygen-centered free radicals. This would be associated with the binding process. In such a way, the artemisinins might act as (irreversibile) inhibitors. Iron may, or may not, be associated with the activation process. No specific biological target in the parasite has yet been identified in support of this theory, but it may be membrane-bound proteins.

Artesunate is a water soluble derivative of artemisinin, an antimalarial compound isolated from the Chinese herb Qinghao (Artemisia annua). Artesunate is rapidly metabolized to dihydroartemisinin (DHA) in the body. Chemically, artesunate, and its active metabolite, DHA, are sesquiterpene lactones with a trioxane ring containing a peroxide bridge. The peroxide bridge appears to be essential for the antimalarial activity of artesunate. Structure-activity relationship studies show that the deoxy derivative of DHA (that lack the peroxide bridge) was 277-fold less active than DHA. The activity of deoxyartesunate was not measured. Deoxy derivatives of other artemisinin analogs were 10- to 1000-fold less active compared to the parent compounds. Artesunate increases superoxide anion production and lipid peroxidation in falciparum-infected erythrocytes in vitro. However, artesunate does not suppress the activity of antioxidant enzymes (superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione reductase, and glutathione peroxidase) in infected or uninfected erythrocytes. Erythrocytes infected with the ring or trophozoite forms in vitro accumulate 100- and 180- fold higher concentrations of DHA (12 nM ie, 3.40 ng/mL), respectively, compared to uninfected erythrocytes. These experiments were performed in a medium containing 10% human serum. The relevance of these findings to the uptake in vivo is unclear. The precise mechanism by which artesunate exhibits antiplasmodial activity is not understood.

A 2025 systematic review notes Artesunate's pharmacological activities (antimalarial, antiparasite,antitumor, antivirus, antiinflammation, and antibacterial),and that it is a highly effective antimalarial agent with the potential to induce organ toxicity under certain conditions. The authors note that mechanisms of Artesunate-induced toxicity include oxidative stress, inflammation, and apoptotic signaling patthhways.They also note that Artesunate ameliorates MASH (Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatohepatitis) by reducing

inflammation and lipid accumulation by regulating NLRP3 inflammasome and reducing lipid accumulation (SREBP-1c, FAS).

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Toxicological Information

A 2025 systematic review discusses how treatment with Artesunate can produce liver and kidney damage in specific scenarios, i.e., when patients receive doses that are too high or receive extended periods of therapy. This hepatic and renal damage involves free-radical damage, cellular respiration failure, and inflammatory reaction pathways. The authors note that a combination of antioxidants, natural compounds, and optimized doses is an effective strategy to help protect the liver and kidneys.

In an open label study of severe malaria in 104 patients in the United States, elevations in ALT occurred in 27% of subjects, AST in 49%, and bilirubin in 17%. These abnormalities, however, were attributable to the hemolysis and liver involvement that are common in patients with acute, severe malaria. None of the elevations were attributed to drug induced liver injury. Since licensure of artesunate for injection and its more widescale clinical use in the United States, there have been no reports of acute liver injury attributed to its use.

Likelihood score: E (unlikely cause of clinically apparent liver injury).

Limited information indicates that a maternal dose of 200 mg orally produced low levels in milk and would not be expected to cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants, especially if the infant is older than 2 months. Withholding breastfeeding for 6 hours after a dose should markedly reduce the dose the infant receives.

In general, very small amounts of antimalarial drugs are excreted in the breast milk of lactating women. Because the quantity of antimalarial drugs transferred in breast milk is insufficient to provide adequate protection against malaria, infants who require chemoprophylaxis must receive the recommended dosages of antimalarial drugs.

Breastfed infants who were given dihydroartemisinin and piperaquine as a treatment for malaria had a higher frequency of vomiting than non-breastfed infants given the drugs. Whether this finding applies to infants who receive dihydroartemisinin via breastmilk has not been studied.

Relevant published information was not found as of the revision date.

A 2025 systematic review states that Artesunate's routes of administration include oral, intramuscular, rectal, and intravenous.

A 2025 systematic review states that Artesunate has shown potential genotoxic effects in animals, e.g., increased oxidative damage in hepatic tissues and DNA fragmentation in spermatozoa.

The activity of artemisinin in combination with other antimalarial drugs against P. falciparum was measured in vitro and against P. berghei in vivo. A combination of artemisinin with mefloquine was synergistic whereas that with pyrimethamine was antagonistic in vitro and in vivo. A combination of artemisinin with other antimalarials (sulfadiazine, sulfadoxine, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, cycloguanil, and dapsone) was also shown to be antagonistic in vivo.

There has been some concern that antipyretics might attenuate the host defense against malaria, as their use is associated with delayed parasite clearance. However, this appears to result from delaying cytoadherence, which is likely to be beneficial. There is no reason to withhold antipyretics in malaria. ...Paracetamol (acetaminophen) and ibuprofen are the preferred options for reducing fever.

Basic treatment: Establish a patent airway (oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway, if needed). Suction if necessary. Watch for signs of respiratory insufficiency and assist ventilations if needed. Administer oxygen by nonrebreather mask at 10 to 15 L/min. Monitor for pulmonary edema and treat if necessary ... . Monitor for shock and treat if necessary ... . Anticipate seizures and treat if necessary ... . For eye contamination, flush eyes immediately with water. Irrigate each eye continuously with 0.9% saline (NS) during transport ... . Do not use emetics. For ingestion, rinse mouth and administer 5 ml/kg up to 200 ml of water for dilution if the patient can swallow, has a strong gag reflex, and does not drool ... . Cover skin burns with dry sterile dressings after decontamination ... . /Poisons A and B/

Advanced treatment: Consider orotracheal or nasotracheal intubation for airway control in the patient who is unconscious, has severe pulmonary edema, or is in severe respiratory distress. Positive-pressure ventilation techniques with a bag valve mask device may be beneficial. Consider drug therapy for pulmonary edema ... . Consider administering a beta agonist such as albuterol for severe bronchospasm ... . Monitor cardiac rhythm and treat arrhythmias as necessary ... . Start IV administration of D5W /SRP: "To keep open", minimal flow rate/. Use 0.9% saline (NS) or lactated Ringer's if signs of hypovolemia are present. For hypotension with signs of hypovolemia, administer fluid cautiously. Watch for signs of fluid overload ... . Treat seizures with diazepam or lorazepam ... . Use proparacaine hydrochloride to assist eye irrigation ... . /Poisons A and B/

/CASE REPORTS/ A total of 83 pregnant women with Plasmodium falciparum malaria, administered artesunate or artemether, often followed by quinine or mefloquine, were followed weekly until delivery. Overall 73 pregnancies (88%) resulted in live births, 3 (4%) in abortions, and 2 (3%) in still births. There were no congenital abnormalities and the 46 children followed for more than a year all developed normally

/CASE REPORTS/ A 33-year-old man presented with acute uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Eleven hours after receiving artesunate 4 mg/kg, he was admitted to the inpatient department with agitation, generalized pruritus, leftsided chest pain, and dyspnea. He was apyrexial with pulse 96/min, BP 150/110 mmHg, wheezes over both lung fields, and a widespread urticarial rash over the limbs and abdomen. Parenteral chlorpheniramine and dexamethasone were given. He improved over 2 hr; the vital signs returned to normal, the rash faded, and chest auscultation revealed only a few wheezes, but then the rash reappeared suddenly and the patient became clammy and sweaty and collapsed to the floor, unconscious with impalpable pulses. Adrenaline and dexamethasone were given. He regained consciousness after 1-2 min, vomited, and became extremely agitated. The following morning he was well with only a fading urticarial rash. Antimalarial treatment was completed with quinine and doxycycline. On questioning further, he remembered that 2 years previously he had been treated for malaria with /artesunate-melfoquine/ (MAS3), and had been admitted to hospital because of a generalized rash. Unfortunately his records were untraceable. He denied previous allergic reactions or asthma.

/CASE REPORTS/ A 26-year-old previously well man presented to the Research Unit's malaria clinic with acute uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Four years previously he had received artesunate-mefloquine (MAS3) antimalarial treatment without adverse reactions. About 15-20 min after receiving oral artesunate 4 mg/kg, he developed generalized pruritus and a widespread urticarial rash. He was given chlorpheniramine (8 mg) orally. After 1 hr he felt dizzy, and was found to be hypotensive (blood pressure, BP, 80/40 mmHg), but the chest was clear and other vital signs remained normal. After 2 hr the hypotension, rash, and dizziness had resolved. Following the Unit's previously satisfactory experience with rechallenge, artesunate was given again the next day. The patient received chlorpheniramine orally 30 min before this second dose, as pretreatment. Mefloquine was not given. One hour later, he developed pruritus, periorbital, lip, and forearm swelling, tachycardia (140/min), hypotension (90/30 mmHg), a widespread urticarial rash and labored breathing, although the chest remained clear. He was given dexamethasone, chlorpheniramine, and adrenaline twice and recovered rapidly. He was kept under observation for the afternoon and then discharged home. The third dose of artesunate was withheld and he was given mefloquine alone under supervision without further problems.

/CASE REPORTS/ In July 1996, a 36-year-old American geologist in Ghana had fever and chills without associated neurologic symptoms. His blood smear revealed P. falciparum. ... He took two /artesunate/ tablets on day 1, followed by one tablet daily for the next four days. He became afebrile on day 2. A blood smear on day 5 contained no malaria parasites. Two days after completing the artesunate treatment, the patient noted that his gait was unsteady. His electroencephalogram was normal. Over the next week, worsening ataxia and slurred speech developed. Three weeks later, he was evacuated to a London hospital. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and a lumbar puncture revealed no abnormalities. In September 1996, the patient was admitted to a southern California hospital with persistent neurologic symptoms. He had slurred speech; a wide-based, ataxic gait; and impaired heel-to-shin and rapid alternating movements. A peripheral smear was again positive for plasmodium species, but the parasites were too scant to speciate. He was re-treated with oral quinine and doxycycline. In October 1996 he began rehabilitation therapy. One month later, his ataxia was moderately improved, and his speech was nearly normal. ... Our patient had neurologic sequelae over a four-month period immediately after treatment with artesunate for P. falciparum. Since cerebellar dysfunction would be a highly unusual complication of malaria, this case serves as a warning of the need for further attentiveness to the neurotoxic side effects of artemisinin compounds.

For more Human Toxicity Excerpts (Complete) data for ARTESUNIC ACID (7 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

/LABORATORY ANIMALS: Acute Exposure/ Many animal studies suggest that systemic artesunate has immunoregulatory activity. /The authors/ investigated the effect of topical artesunate on contact sensitivity in guinea pigs sensitized with dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB). Female hairless guinea pigs were used and the contact reaction graded by visual (5 point) score and erythema measured with a color analyzer. Topical artesunate inhibited the elicitation reaction of contact hypersensitivity when given at the 1st and 12th hr after challenge (p < 0.05), but showed no effect when given from day 3 to day 1 before challenge (p > 0.05). Artesunate had no effect on toxic (irritant) contact dermatitis from 20% croton oil (p > 0.05). The results indicate that topical application of artesunate may offer a novel treatment of allergic contact dermatitis and other cutaneous immune-mediated disorders.

/LABORATORY ANIMALS: Chronic Exposure or Carcinogenicity/ In the present investigation, artesunate (ART) was found also to inhibit angiogenesis in vivo and in vitro. The anti-angiogenic effect in vivo was evaluated in nude mice by means of human ovarian cancer HO-8910 implantation and immunohistochemical stainings for microvessel (CD31), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and VEGF receptor KDR/flk-1. Tumor growth was decreased and microvessel density was reduced following drug treatment with no apparent toxicity to the animals. ART also remarkably lowered VEGF expression on tumor cells and KDR/flk-1 expression on endothelial cells as well as tumor cells. The in vitro effect of ART was tested on models of angiogenesis, namely, proliferation, migration and tube formation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). The results showed that ART significantly inhibited angiogenesis in a dose-dependent form in the range of 0.5-50 umol/L. Additionally, the inhibitory effect of ART on HVUEC proliferation was stronger than that on Hela, JAR, HO-8910 cancer cells, NIH-3T3 fibroblast cells and human endometrial cells, indicating that ART was selectively against HUVEC. These findings and the known low toxicity of ART are clues that ART may be a promising angiogenesis inhibitor.

/LABORATORY ANIMALS: Developmental or Reproductive Toxicity/ Reproductive studies performed in rats and rabbits have show dose-dependent loss of implantation without major congenital abnormalities with artemisinin, including artesunate. Dose within the therapeutic range have abortive effects. The dose, and presumably exposure, of the artemisinin that cause reduced fetal survival and increased abortion rates in experimental animals are similar to the proposed human dose. ... Despite the consistent finding of impaired fetal survival following exposure to artemisinin in the first trimester in animals, none of the studies in any animal species has shown teratogenicity.

/LABORATORY ANIMALS: Developmental or Reproductive Toxicity/ In experiments carried out in mice, hamsters, guinea pigs and rabbits both dihydroartemisinin and artesunate showed contragestational effect. In mice and rabbits they caused embryo absorption whereas in hamsters and guinea pigs they induced abortion. The contragestational ED50 of dihydroartemisinin given sc on d 7 of pregnancy in mice and d 5 of pregnancy in hamsters were 32.8(27.7-38.9) mg.kg-1 and 6.1(5.6-6.7) mg.kg-1 respectively. The ED50 of this drug given im on d 18 of pregnancy in guinea pigs was 18.3(13.9-24.2) mg.kg-1. Dihydroartemisinin also showed mid-pregnancy terminating effect in hamsters. The contragestational ED50 of artesunate given sc on d 5 of pregnancy in hamsters and the ED50 of sodium artesunate given sc on d 5-8 of pregnancy in hamsters were 12.2(10.3-14.4) mg.kg-1 and 1.0(0.9-1.2) mg.kg-1 daily respectively. Results of light microscopic examination revealed that dihydroartemisinin was selectively toxic to embryo sac. At dose levels sufficient to induce embryo sac necrosis, dihydroartemisinin did not injure the uterus and ovary of the maternal animals. On the ground of the foregoing observations we consider that dihydroartemisinin, artesunate and their analogous drugs should not be used to treat malaria in pregnant women and there is the possibility to exploit intentional abortion agents from artemisinin derivatives.

For more Non-Human Toxicity Excerpts (Complete) data for ARTESUNIC ACID (14 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Clinical Laboratory Methods

Analyte: artesunate; matrix: blood (plasma); procedure: high-performance liquid chromatography with ultraviolet detection at 290 nm

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Protein Binding

Artesunate and its metabolite DHA are approximately 93% protein bound in plasma. Artesunate can bind to serum albumin.

<<<PAGE 12>>>
Record Description

Artesunate is an artemisinin derivative that is the hemisuccinate ester of the lactol resulting from the reduction of the lactone carbonyl group of artemisinin. It is used, generally as the sodium salt, for the treatment of malaria. It has a role as a ferroptosis inducer, an antineoplastic agent and an antimalarial. It is a hemisuccinate, a sesquiterpenoid, a dicarboxylic acid monoester, a cyclic acetal, an artemisinin derivative and a semisynthetic derivative.

Artesunate is indicated for the initial treatment of severe malaria. The World Health Organization recommends artesunate as first line treatment for severe malaria. Artesunate was developed out of a need for a more hydrophilic derivative of [artemisinin]. Artesunate was granted FDA approval on 26 May 2020.

Artesunate for injection is an antimalarial drug used as the initial treatment of severe malaria in both adults and children. Typically, infusions of artesunate are continued for 2 to 7 days until the patient can tolerate oral antimalarial therapy. Artesunate therapy is associated with mild-to-moderate serum aminotransferase elevations during therapy but has not been linked instances of clinically apparent liver injury.

artesunate has been reported in Artemisia carvifolia, Artemisia apiacea, and Acronychia pubescens with data available.

Artesunate is a water-soluble, semi-synthetic derivative of the sesquiterpine lactone artemisinin with anti-malarial, anti-schistosomiasis, antiviral, and potential anti-neoplastic activities. Upon hydrolysis of artesunate's active endoperoxide bridge moiety by liberated heme in parasite-infected red blood cells, reactive oxygen species and carbon-centered radicals form, which have been shown to damage and kill parasitic organisms. Additionally, in vitro studies demonstrate that this agent induces DNA breakage in a dose-dependent manner. Artesunate has also been shown to stimulate cell differentiation, arrest the cell cycle in the G1 and G2/M phases, inhibit cell proliferation, and induce apoptosis through mitochondrial and caspase signaling pathways. Artemisinin is isolated from the plant Artemisia annua.

A water-soluble, semi-synthetic derivative of the sesquiterpene lactone artemisinin with anti-malarial, anti-schistosomiasis, antiviral, and potential anti-neoplastic activities

RN given for (3R-(3alpha,5abeta,6beta,8abeta,9alpha,10alpha,12beta,(2aR*))-isomer; succinic ester of artemether

<<<PAGE 13>>>
GHS Classification

H302 (95.7%): Harmful if swallowed [Warning Acute toxicity, oral]

H312 (93.5%): Harmful in contact with skin [Warning Acute toxicity, dermal]

H332 (93.5%): Harmful if inhaled [Warning Acute toxicity, inhalation]

P261, P264, P270, P271, P280, P301+P317, P302+P352, P304+P340, P317, P321, P330, P362+P364, and P501 (click each P-code to see the statement)

Aggregated GHS information provided per 46 reports by companies from 5 notifications to the ECHA C&L Inventory. Each notification may be associated with multiple companies.

Information may vary between notifications depending on impurities, additives, and other factors. The percentage value in parenthesis indicates the notified classification ratio from companies that provide hazard codes. Only hazard codes with percentage values above 10% are shown. For more detailed information, please visit ECHA C&L website.

H251 (100%): Self-heating; may catch fire [Danger Self-heating substances and mixtures]

H317 (100%): May cause an allergic skin reaction [Warning Sensitization, Skin]

P235, P261, P272, P280, P302+P352, P321, P333+P317, P362+P364, P407, P410, P413, P420, and P501 (click each P-code to see the statement)

Aggregated GHS information provided per 3 reports by companies from 1 notifications to the ECHA C&L Inventory. Each notification may be associated with multiple companies.
