<<<PAGE 1>>>
Drug Indication

Ceftriaxone is used for the treatment of the infections (respiratory, skin, soft tissue, UTI, ENT) caused by susceptible organisms. Organisms that are generally susceptible to ceftriaxone include S. pneumoniae, S. pyogenes (group A beta-hemolytic streptococci), coagulase-negative staphylococci, Some Enterobacter spp, H. influenzae, N. gonorrhoeae, P. mirabilis, E. coli, Klebsiella spp, M. catarrhalis, B. burgdorferi, and some oral anaerobes.

<<<PAGE 2>>>
Pharmacodynamics

Ceftriaxone is a cephalosporin/cephamycin beta-lactam antibiotic used in the treatment of bacterial infections caused by susceptible, usually gram-positive, organisms. Ceftriaxone has <i>in vitro</i> activity against gram-positive aerobic, gram-negative aerobic, and anaerobic bacteria. The bactericidal activity of ceftriaxone results from the inhibition of cell wall synthesis and is mediated through ceftriaxone binding to penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs). Ceftriaxone is stable against hydrolysis by a variety of beta-lactamases, including penicillinases, and cephalosporinases and extended-spectrum beta-lactamases. However, resistance to ceftriaxone usually occurs through beta-lactamase hydrolysis, altered PBPs, or reduced bacterial cell permeability. Ceftriaxone should not be mixed with or giving in the same IV line as diluents/products containing calcium as they may cause ceftriaxone to precipitate. Ceftriaxone use may also cause biliary sludge or gallbladder pseudolithiasis.

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Absorption, Distribution and Excretion

Ceftriaxone is only given as an injection, either intramuscularly or intravenously. Ceftriaxone is less than 1% bioavailable if given orally.

Ceftriaxone is primarily eliminated in the urine (33-67%). The remainder is eliminated through secretion in the bile and removed from the body via the feces.

The apparent volume of distribution of an intravenous or intramuscular dose in healthy patients is 5.78 to 13.5 L. The volume of distribution of an intravenous or intramuscular dose in septic patients is 6.48 to 35.2 L. Ceftriaxone has good enough CSF penetration to be used as an effective treatment of bacterial meningitis.

The plasma clearance of ceftriaxone in healthy adults receiving a 0.15-3g dose is 0.58 to 1.45 L/hour. The renal clearance of ceftriaxone is 0.32 to 0.73 L/hour. In intensive care unit patients, ceftriaxone's total drug clearance was 0.96L/h (0.55-1.28 L/h), and unbound drug clearance was 1.91 L/h (1.46-6.20 L/h).

<<<PAGE 4>>>
Metabolism/Metabolites

Ceftriaxone is eliminated unchanged in the urine by glomerular filtration (60%) and bile (40%) (A633). Route of Elimination: Thirty-three percent to 67% of a ceftriaxone dose was excreted in the urine as unchanged drug and the remainder was secreted in the bile and ultimately found in the feces as microbiologically inactive compounds. Half Life: 5.8-8.7 hours

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Biological Half-Life

The elimination half-life of ceftriaxone is 5.8-8.7 hours. The half-life of ceftriaxone in the middle ear fluid has been estimated to be 25 hours.

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Mechanism of Action

Ceftriaxone works by inhibiting the mucopeptide synthesis in the bacterial cell wall. The beta-lactam moiety of ceftriaxone binds to carboxypeptidases, endopeptidases, and transpeptidases in the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane. These enzymes are involved in cell-wall synthesis and cell division. Binding of ceftriaxone to these enzymes causes the enzyme to lose activity; therefore, the bacteria produce defective cell walls, causing cell death.

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Toxicological Information

Ceftriaxone works by inhibiting the mucopeptide synthesis in the bacterial cell wall. The beta-lactam moiety of Ceftriaxone binds to carboxypeptidases, endopeptidases, and transpeptidases in the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane. These enzymes are involved in cell-wall synthesis and cell division. By binding to these enzymes, Ceftriaxone results in the formation of of defective cell walls and cell death.

Parenteral administration of ceftriaxone has been associated with development of biliary sludge in 3% to 46% of patients. The incidence may be higher in children than adults and is associated with higher doses and longer courses of treatment and possibly with fasting or dehydration. The syndrome is referred to as “pseudolithiasis” as the sludge and stones consist largely of ceftriaxone and they resolve spontaneously when the drug is stopped, indicating that surgery can be avoided. Most cases occur with minimal or no symptoms. Frank symptoms of cholecystitis are reported in up to 5% of patients who develop pseudo-lithiasis. Typically, serum enzymes and bilirubin levels remain normal even with biliary colic, but in rare instances there is cholestatic jaundice or gallstone pancreatitis that can be severe and require surgical intervention. Sludge and symptoms of gallbladder disease can arise within a few days of starting therapy, but typically resolve rapidly once ceftriaxone is stopped, although sludge and gallstones may be detectable by ultrasound for several months.

Ceftriaxone can also lead to an immunoallergic form of cholestatic hepatitis similar to what has been described with other cephalosporins. This reaction is idiosyncratic and is very rare. Symptoms of abdominal pain, nausea, pruritis and jaundice arise within 1 to 4 weeks of initiation of therapy and may worsen for 1 to 2 weeks after stopping the antibiotic. A cholestatic pattern of serum enzyme elevations and immunoallergic features of fever, rash and eosinophilia are common. The injury is usually mild and self-limited.

Likelihood score: B (ceftriaxone is a very likely cause of clinically apparent liver injury and can also lead to biliary sludge and “pseudolithiasis” caused by crystallization of ceftriaxone in bile present in the gallbladder or biliary tree).

No indication of carcinogenicity to humans (not listed by IARC).

Some observed adverse reactions ( < 0.1%) include abdominal pain, agranulocytosis, allergic pneumonitis, anaphylaxis, basophilia, biliary lithiasis, bronchospasm, colitis, dyspepsia, epistaxis, flatulence, gallbladder sludge, glycosuria, hematuria, jaundice, leukocytosis, lymphocytosis, monocytosis, nephrolithiasis, palpitations, a decrease in the prothrombin time, renal precipitations, seizures, and serum sickness (RxList, A308).

Limited information indicates that ceftriaxone produce low levels in milk, which are not expected to cause adverse effects in breastfed infants. Occasionally disruption of the infant's gastrointestinal flora, resulting in diarrhea or thrush have been reported with cephalosporins, but these effects have not been adequately evaluated. Ceftriaxone is acceptable in nursing mothers.

A mother who was exclusively nursing her 52-day-old infant developed a soft-tissue infection. She was treated with intravenous teicoplanin 400 mg every 12 hours for 3 doses, then 400 mg daily for 5 days total, intravenous ceftriaxone 1 gram daily, topical mupirocin cream twice daily. A careful follow-up indicated that her infant had no adverse effects.

Relevant published information was not found as of the revision date.

Inhalation; dermal or skin contact; ingestion; intravenous (MSDS, A308).

In the case of overdosage, drug concentration would not be reduced by hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. There is no specific antidote. Treatment of overdosage should be symptomatic (RxList, A308).

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Record Description

Ceftriaxone is a third-generation cephalosporin compound having 2-(2-amino-1,3-thiazol-4-yl)-2-(methoxyimino)acetylamino and [(2-methyl-5,6-dioxo-1,2,5,6-tetrahydro-1,2,4-triazin-3-yl)sulfanyl]methyl side-groups. It has a role as an EC 3.5.2.6 (beta-lactamase) inhibitor, an antibacterial drug and a drug allergen. It is a cephalosporin, an oxime O-ether, a member of 1,3-thiazoles and a member of 1,2,4-triazines. It is a conjugate acid of a ceftriaxone(1-).

Ceftriaxone is a broad-spectrum third-generation cephalosporin antibiotic. It has a very long half-life compared to other cephalosporins and is high penetrable into the meninges, eyes, and inner ear. Ceftriaxone has broader and stronger gram-negative coverage then first or second-generation cephalosporins, but worse activity against methicillin-susceptible S.aureus. Ceftriaxone is a commonly used antimicrobial due to its good activity against multi-drug resistant Enterobacteriaceae, its relatively safe adverse effect profile, and its long half-life which allows for the convenience of daily or twice-daily dosing.

Ceftriaxone is a third generation cephalosporin antibiotic which has been associated with development of biliary sludge and biliary colic when given parenterally and in high doses. Ceftriaxone is also associated with rare instances of immunoallergic, usually cholestatic hepatitis similar to the injury associated with other cephalosporins.

ceftriaxone has been reported in Stachybotrys chartarum with data available.

Ceftriaxone is a beta-lactam, third-generation cephalosporin antibiotic with bactericidal activity. Ceftriaxone binds to and inactivates penicillin-binding proteins (PBP) located on the inner membrane of the bacterial cell wall. PBPs participate in the terminal stages of assembling the bacterial cell wall, and in reshaping the cell wall during cell division. Inactivation of PBPs interferes with the cross-linkage of peptidoglycan chains necessary for bacterial cell wall strength and rigidity. This results in the weakening of the bacterial cell wall and causes cell lysis. Compared to the second and first generation cephalosporins, ceftriaxone is more active against gram-negative bacteria and less active against gram-positive bacteria. Ceftriaxone also crosses the blood-brain barrier and reaches therapeutic concentrations in the central nervous system (CNS).

Ceftriaxone is only found in individuals that have used or taken this drug. It is a broad-spectrum cephalosporin antibiotic with a very long half-life and high penetrability to meninges, eyes and inner ears. [PubChem]Ceftriaxone works by inhibiting the mucopeptide synthesis in the bacterial cell wall. The beta-lactam moiety of Ceftriaxone binds to carboxypeptidases, endopeptidases, and transpeptidases in the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane. These enzymes are involved in cell-wall synthesis and cell division. By binding to these enzymes, Ceftriaxone results in the formation of of defective cell walls and cell death.

A broad-spectrum cephalosporin antibiotic and cefotaxime derivative with a very long half-life and high penetrability to meninges, eyes and inner ears.

See also: Cefixime (related); Cefotaxime (broader); Cefotiam (related) ... View More ...

<<<PAGE 9>>>
GHS Classification

H315 (100%): Causes skin irritation [Warning Skin corrosion/irritation]

H317 (100%): May cause an allergic skin reaction [Warning Sensitization, Skin]

H319 (100%): Causes serious eye irritation [Warning Serious eye damage/eye irritation]

H334 (100%): May cause allergy or asthma symptoms or breathing difficulties if inhaled [Danger Sensitization, respiratory]

H335 (100%): May cause respiratory irritation [Warning Specific target organ toxicity, single exposure; Respiratory tract irritation]

P233, P260, P261, P264, P264+P265, P271, P272, P280, P284, P302+P352, P304+P340, P305+P351+P338, P319, P321, P332+P317, P333+P317, P337+P317, P342+P316, P362+P364, P403, P403+P233, P405, and P501 (click each P-code to see the statement)

Aggregated GHS information provided per 5 reports by companies from 1 notifications to the ECHA C&L Inventory. Each notification may be associated with multiple companies.

Information may vary between notifications depending on impurities, additives, and other factors. The percentage value in parenthesis indicates the notified classification ratio from companies that provide hazard codes. Only hazard codes with percentage values above 10% are shown. For more detailed information, please visit ECHA C&L website.
