<<<PAGE 1>>>
Drug Indication

Administered intravenously, vancomycin is indicated in adult and pediatric patients for the treatment of septicemia, infective endocarditis, skin and skin structure infections, bone infections, and lower respiratory tract infections. Administered orally, vancomycin is indicated in adult and pediatric patients for the treatment of _Clostridium difficile_-associated diarrhea and for enterocolitis caused by _Staphylococcus aureus_ (including methicillin-resistant strains).

Vancomycin is a tricyclic glycopeptide antibiotic derived from the organism Streptococcus orientalis. It is prescribed to treat and prevent various bacterial infections caused by gram-positive bacteria, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). This medication is also effective against streptococci, enterococci, and methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) infections. Vancomycin has numerous FDA-approved and off-label clinical uses, which are listed below.

<<<PAGE 2>>>
Therapeutic Uses

Vancomycin hydrochloride is indicated for the treatment of serious or severe infections caused by susceptible strains of methicillin-resistant (beta-lactam-resistant) staphylococci. It is indicated for penicillin-allergic patients, for patients who cannot receive or who have failed to respond to other drugs, including the penicillins or cephalosporins, and for infections caused by vancomycin-susceptible organisms that are resistant to other antimicrobial drugs. Vancomycin hydrochloride is indicated for initial therapy when methicillin-resistant staphylococci are suspected, but after susceptibility data are available, therapy should be adjusted accordingly. /Included in US product label/

Vancomycin hydrochloride is effective in the treatment of staphylococcal endocarditis. Its effectiveness has been documented in other infections due to staphylococci, including septicemia, bone infections, lower respiratory tract infections, skin and skin-structure infections. When staphylococcal infections are localized and purulent, antibiotics are used as adjuncts to appropriate surgical measures. /Included in US product label/

The parenteral form of vancomycin hydrochloride may be administered orally for treatment of antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis produced by C. difficile and for staphylococcal enterocolitis. Parenteral administration of vancomycin hydrochloride alone is of unproven benefit for these indications. Vancomycin hydrochloride is not effective by the oral route for other types of infection. /Included in US product label/

For more Therapeutic Uses (Complete) data for Vancomycin (12 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Drug Warnings

Ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity are the most serious adverse effects of parenteral vancomycin therapy. The incidences of ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity have not been well established, but clinical experience to date suggests that these adverse effects occur relatively infrequently. Ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity are most likely to occur in patients with renal impairment, patients receiving IV vancomycin in high doses or for prolonged periods, or patients receiving other ototoxic and/or nephrotoxic drugs. Although ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity have been associated with serum or blood vancomycin concentrations of 80-100 ug/mL, these reactions have occurred with concentrations as low as 25 ug/mL. Correlations between serum vancomycin concentrations and ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity still remain to be clarified. Ototoxicity may be transient or permanent. Vancomycin may cause damage to the auditory branch of the eighth cranial nerve and permanent deafness has occurred. Vertigo, dizziness, and tinnitus have been reported rarely. Tinnitus may precede the onset of deafness and necessitates discontinuance of the drug. Deafness may progress despite cessation of vancomycin therapy. Vancomycin-induced nephrotoxicity may be manifested by transient elevations in BUN or serum creatinine concentrations, and the presence of hyaline and granular casts and albumin in the urine. Fatal uremia has occurred. Rarely, the drug has been associated with acute interstitial nephritis.

Rapid IV administration of vancomycin has resulted in a hypotensive reaction frequently referred to as the "red-man syndrome" or "red-neck syndrome". The reaction is characterized by a sudden decrease in blood pressure which can be severe and may be accompanied by flushing and/or a maculopapular or erythematous rash on the face, neck, chest, and upper extremities; the latter manifestations may also occur in the absence of hypotension. Wheezing, dyspnea, angioedema, urticaria, and pruritus may also occur. Rarely, cardiac arrest or seizures have occurred. Vancomycin-induced hypotension appears to result from a negative inotropic and vasodilating action produced in part by a release of histamine, which is directly related to the rate of infusion; the release of histamine also appears to be responsible for the usual manifestations (e.g., erythema, rash, pruritus) of the "red" characterization. The reaction usually begins a few minutes after the vancomycin infusion is started, but may not occur until after the infusion is completed, and usually resolves spontaneously over one to several hours after discontinuance of the infusion. If the hypotensive reaction is severe, the use of antihistamines, corticosteroids, or IV fluids may be necessary. The hypotensive reaction is related to the rate of infusion of vancomycin and has been reported most frequently when the drug was administered over a period of 10 minutes or less; however, the reaction may also occur rarely when the drug is infused over a period of 1 hour or longer. To minimize the risk of a hypotensive reaction, vancomycin should be infused over a period of at least 1 hour and the patient's blood pressure should be monitored during the infusion. In patients who have had the reaction, subsequent doses of vancomycin can usually be given without adverse effect if administered at a slow rate (e.g., over several hours). Pretreatment with antihistamines may be of benefit. If attempts to minimize the reaction fail, use of another anti-infective agent may be necessary. The reaction reportedly has occurred in more than 50% of healthy individuals given vancomycin but less frequently when the drug is used therapeutically.

Urticaria, exfoliative dermatitis, macular rashes, eosinophilia, vasculitis, a shock-like state, transient anaphylaxis, and, occasionally, vascular collapse have been reported in patients receiving vancomycin. The drug also has been associated with Stevens-Johnson syndrome in at least one patient.

A throbbing pain in the muscles of the back and neck has been reported with vancomycin and can usually be minimized or avoided by slower administration of the drug. In patients undergoing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), intraperitoneal administration of vancomycin has been associated with chemical peritonitis, a syndrome consisting of a cloudy dialysate, which may be accompanied by abdominal pain and fever. Chemical peritonitis usually disappears shortly after discontinuance of intraperitoneal vancomycin. Other adverse effects of vancomycin include chills and fever. Priapism after a second IV dose of vancomycin, with recurrence on inadvertent rechallenge, occurred in a 37-year-old man with severe underlying diabetes mellitus; bilateral phlebotomy of the corpus cavernosum resulted in resolution of the priapism.

For more Drug Warnings (Complete) data for Vancomycin (22 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

<<<PAGE 4>>>
Pharmacodynamics

Vancomycin is a branched tricyclic glycosylated nonribosomal peptide often reserved as the "drug of last resort", used only after treatment with other antibiotics has failed. Vancomycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections: <i>Listeria monocytogenes</i>, <i>Streptococcus pyogenes</i>, <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> (including penicillin-resistant strains), <i>Streptococcus agalactiae</i>, <i>Actinomyces</i> species, and <i>Lactobacillus</i> species. The combination of vancomycin and an aminoglycoside acts synergistically in vitro against many strains of Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus bovis, enterococci, and the viridans group streptococci.

<<<PAGE 5>>>
Absorption, Distribution and Excretion

Poorly absorbed from gastrointestinal tract, however systemic absorption (up to 60%) may occur following intraperitoneal administration.

In the first 24 hours, about 75-80% of an administered dose of vancomycin is excreted in urine by glomerular filtration.

The volume of distribution, as discussed in the literature, varies between 0.4-1 L/kg.

The mean plasma clearance of vancomycin is about 0.058 L/kg/h.

Vancomycin hydrochloride is not appreciably absorbed from the GI tract in most patients and must be given parenterally for the treatment of systemic infections. Oral bioavailability usually is less than 5%; however, limited data suggest that clinically important serum concentrations of the drug may result following enteral or oral administration of vancomycin in some patients with colitis and/or in those with renal impairment.

In adults with normal renal function who received multiple 1 g doses of vancomycin (15 mg/kg) given by IV infusion over 1 hour, mean plasma concentrations immediately after completion of the infusion are approximately 63 ug/mL and mean plasma concentrations 2 and 11 hours later are approximately 23 or 8 ug/mL, respectively. When multiple 500-mg doses are given by IV infusion over 30 minutes, mean plasma concentrations are about 49 ug/mL immediately following the infusion and about 10 ug/mL 6 hours after infusion.

Vancomycin is distributed into milk following IV administration. Systemic absorption of oral vancomycin is very low and it is not known whether the drug distributes into human milk following oral administration.

Vancomycin readily crosses the placenta and is distributed into cord blood.

Vancomycin is approximately 55% serum protein bound as measured by ultrafiltration at vancomycin serum concentrations of 10 to 100 mcg/mL. After IV administration of vancomycin hydrochloride, inhibitory concentrations are present in pleural, pericardial, ascitic, and synovial fluids; in urine; in peritoneal dialysis fluid; and in atrial appendage tissue. Vancomycin hydrochloride does not readily diffuse across normal meninges into the spinal fluid; but, when the meninges are inflamed, penetration into the spinal fluid occurs.

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Metabolism/Metabolites

Since almost 75-80% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine after the first 24 hours following administration, there is seemingly no apparent metabolism of the drug. The concentration of vancomycin in the liver tissue and bile 24 hours after administration has also been reported at or below detection limits as well.

Free toxin may be removed by opsonization via the reticuloendothelial system (primarily the liver and kidneys) or it may be degraded through cellular internalization via the lysosomes. Lysosomes are membrane-enclosed organelles that contain an array of digestive enzymes, including several proteases. Route of Elimination: In the first 24 hours, about 75% of an administered dose of vancomycin is excreted in urine by glomerular filtration. Half Life: Half-life in normal renal patients is approximately 6 hours (range 4 to 11 hours). In the first 24 hours, about 75% of an administered dose of vancomycin is excreted in urine by glomerular filtration. In anephric patients, the average half-life of elimination is 7.5 days.

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Biological Half-Life

Half-life in normal renal patients is approximately 6 hours (range 4 to 11 hours). In anephric patients, the average half-life of elimination is 7.5 days.

The mean elimination half-life of vancomycin from plasma is 4 to 6 hours in subjects with normal renal function.

In anephric patients, the average half-life of elimination is 7.5 days.

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Mechanism of Action

The bactericidal action of vancomycin results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis. Specifically, vancomycin prevents incorporation of N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM)- and N-acetylglucosamine (NAG)-peptide subunits from being incorporated into the peptidoglycan matrix, which forms the major structural component of Gram-positive cell walls. Vancomycin forms hydrogen bonds with the terminal D-alanyl-D-alanine moieties of the NAM/NAG-peptides, preventing the incorporation of the NAM/NAG-peptide subunits into the peptidoglycan matrix. In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis. There is no cross-resistance between vancomycin and other antibiotics. Vancomycin is not active in vitro against gram-negative bacilli, mycobacteria, or fungi.

Vancomycin is bactericidal and appears to bind to the bacterial cell wall causing blockage of glycopeptide polymerization. This effect, which occurs at a site different from that affected by the penicillins, produces immediate inhibition of cell wall synthesis and secondary damage to the cytoplasmic membrane. Magnesium, manganese, calcium, and ferrous ions reduce the degree of adsorption of vancomycin to the cell wall, but the in vivo importance of this interaction is unknown.

The bactericidal action of vancomycin results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis. In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis.

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Toxicological Information

Vancomycin therapy is correlated with nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity. Although there are numerous case reports of acute renal failure attributed to vancomycin use, there is currently limited data suggesting a direct causal relationship. The proposed nephrotoxicity mechanism involves vancomycin's oxidative effect on proximal renal tubule cells, causing tubular ischemia. Common risk factors for nephrotoxicity include preexisting kidney disease, concurrent administration of nephrotoxic medications, advanced age, and dehydration. Although vancomycin-induced nephrotoxicity is commonly reversible, it can be challenging to differentiate this condition from acute tubulointerstitial nephritis and worsening renal function due to uncontrolled infection. In the absence of a causative explanation, vancomycin-induced nephrotoxicity may be identified by elevated serum creatinine levels. Adjusting vancomycin dosages based on the patient's estimated creatinine clearance is a common method to prevent nephrotoxicity. Patients who exhibit signs of acute renal failure precipitated by vancomycin therapy should promptly discontinue treatment. Nephrotoxicity has been reported in patients receiving oral and intravenous vancomycin. Cases of nephrotoxicity associated with oral vancomycin have typically been encountered in patients older than 65.

Ototoxicity is a rare complication of vancomycin monotherapy and is common in patients receiving excessive vancomycin doses, concurrent ototoxic medications (eg, aminoglycosides, loop diuretics, antineoplastic agents), and those with underlying hearing loss conditions. Treatment should stop if patients experience signs of cytotoxicity, such as tinnitus, loss of hearing, and unbalanced movements. Vancomycin-induced ototoxicity may be irreversible for some patients. Serial auditory function testing may be beneficial in identifying early symptoms.

The bactericidal action of vancomycin results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis. Specifically, vancomycin prevents incorporation of N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM)- and N-acetylglucosamine (NAG)-peptide subunits from being incorporated into the peptidoglycan matrix; which forms the major structural component of Gram-positive cell walls. The large hydrophilic molecule is able to form hydrogen bond interactions with the terminal D-alanyl-D-alanine moieties of the NAM/NAG-peptides. Normally this is a five-point interaction. This binding of vancomycin to the D-Ala-D-Ala prevents the incorporation of the NAM/NAG-peptide subunits into the peptidoglycan matrix. In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis. There is no cross-resistance between vancomycin and other antibiotics. Vancomycin is not active in vitro against gram-negative bacilli, mycobacteria, or fungi.

Intravenous vancomycin is associated with minor, transient and asymptomatic elevations in serum aminotransferase levels in 1% to 5% of patients, but similar or minimally lower rates of abnormalities are usually reported with comparative agents. In rare instances, the serum enzyme elevations are more marked and may be associated with mild symptoms, although usually without jaundice. In recent years, vancomycin has been linked to hypersensitivity reactions, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis and, most commonly, the distinctive syndrome of drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS). These forms of hypersensitivity generally occur only after 2 to 4 weeks of prolonged continuous intravenous (iv) vancomycin therapy. Fever and severe skin rash generally dominate the clinical presentation, but systemic symptoms can include renal, respiratory or heart failure, adenopathy, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, facial edema, and liver injury. Cases of DRESS syndrome associated with vancomycin are often accompanied by serum enzyme elevations (Case 1), but marked elevations, symptoms of liver injury, and jaundice are uncommon. The usual systemic features of vancomycin induced DRESS syndrome are renal rather than liver injury but features of hypersensitivity may be more prominent than organ-specific injury. Nevertheless, in rare instances the liver injury can be severe (Case 2) and result in hepatic failure and death. Patients who receive intravenous vancomycin often have multiple comorbidities including sepsis and receive multiple antibiotics which make the attribution of the hypersensitivity reactions and liver injury with vancomycin difficult. Other more well-known causes of DRESS syndrome include allopurinol, sulfonamides, and the aromatic anticonvulsants. These other causes of DRESS syndrome are more likely to be associated with clinically apparent and even fatal liver injury. DRESS syndrome associated with vancomycin is almost invariably associated with the allele HLA-B*32:01, which can be used in diagnosis and potentially used to screen for this reaction if results can be obtained promptly (before or during the first week of therapy).

Vancomycin is also associated with several forms of acute infusion reactions, most notably anaphylaxis and the vancomycin flushing reaction, previously known as “red man syndrome”. Vancomycin flushing reactions occur typically during the first 15 to 20 minutes of an initial infusion of vancomycin, most commonly when given rapidly and in relative high doses (1000 mg given over less than 60 minutes). The reaction is characterized by flushing, erythema, and itching usually of the face, neck and upper torso, sometimes accompanied by chest and back pain and variable degrees of hypotension. Rarely, flushing reactions have been associated with oral vancomycin therapy, particularly in elderly patients with active colitis and renal dysfunction. The cause of the symptoms is probably the acute degranulation of mast cells by the direct effect of vancomycin or S. Aureus toxins. The mediator of the reaction is histamine and other active amines or components in mast cell granules. Plasma histamine levels are usually elevated in persons with vancomycin flushing reactions, but the correlation of changes in plasma histamine levels and severity of symptoms is poor. Nevertheless, the symptoms of the vancomycin flushing reaction can be prevented or ameliorated by pretreatment with antihistamines. Perhaps a better approach is the use of slower infusion rates and lower doses of vancomycin. Liver injury is not a feature of vancomycin flushing reactions but can arise secondarily in cases with prolonged or severe hypotension.

Likelihood score: A (well established cause of clinically apparent liver injury usually in association with prolonged intravenous therapy and presenting with DRESS syndrome).

Benchmark Dataset for the Liver Toxicity Knowledge Base (LTKB)

No indication of carcinogenicity to humans (not listed by IARC).

Renal failure, principally manifested by increased serum creatinine or BUN concentrations, especially in patients administered large doses of vancomycin, has been reported rarely. A few dozen cases of hearing loss associated with vancomycin have been reported. Reversible neutropenia, usually starting 1 week or more after onset of therapy with vancomycin or after a total dosage of more than 25 g, has been reported for several dozen patients.

Limited information indicates that vancomycin produces low levels in milk and because vancomycin is poorly absorbed orally, it is not likely to reach the bloodstream of the infant or cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants. No special precautions are required.

Relevant published information was not found as of the revision date.

Poorly absorbed from gastrointestinal tract, however systemic absorption may occur following IV administration.

Inflammation at the injection site has been reported. During or soon after rapid infusion of vancomycin, patients may develop anaphylactoid reactions, including hypotension, wheezing, dyspnea, urticaria, or pruritus. Rapid infusion may also cause flushing of the upper body ("red neck") or pain and muscle spasm of the chest and back. These reactions usually resolve within 20 minutes but may persist for several hours. Such events are infrequent if vancomycin is given by a slow infusion over 60 minutes. In studies of normal volunteers, infusion-related events did not occur when vancomycin was administered at a rate of 10 mg/min or less.

Asthma - Reversible bronchoconstriction (narrowing of bronchioles) initiated by the inhalation of irritating or allergenic agents.

Common adverse effects of intravenous vancomycin injection include nephrotoxicity, hypotension, and hypersensitivity reactions (eg, anaphylaxis). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, and the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society, the risk of potential toxicity, including acute kidney injury, is highest if the trough concentration exceeds 15 mg/L and the AUC exceeds 650 mg·h/L.

Vancomycin infusion reaction, previously known as vancomycin flushing syndrome or red man syndrome, is associated with rapid intravenous infusion of vancomycin. Symptoms include flushing, pruritus, and an erythematous rash on the face, neck, and upper torso. Signs of this infusion reaction often appear 4 to 10 minutes after starting or shortly after completing an infusion. The incidence of this reaction varies between 3.7% and 47%. However, there is a direct correlation between the increased incidence of vancomycin infusion reaction and faster vancomycin administration rates. Rapid infusion of vancomycin can also result in accompanying angioedema and hypotension. Therefore, prolonging the infusion time is the primary mitigation strategy. Premedication with antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine or hydroxyzine, can also aid in preventing the occurrence of vancomycin infusion reaction. The most severe forms of this reaction frequently occur in children and patients younger than 40.

Less common adverse effects include local phlebitis, chills, drug fever, skin rash, eosinophilia, and reversible neutropenia. Rarely, DRESS syndrome, ototoxicity, thrombocytopenia, vasculitis, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome have been reported.

Gastrointestinal adverse effects, such as abdominal pain and nausea, are commonly observed in patients receiving oral vancomycin. Dysgeusia, or a distorted sense of taste, is another common adverse reaction unique to oral vancomycin administration. Patients should seek medical attention if these adverse effects become bothersome. Many of these adverse effects are temporary.

Less common adverse effects of oral vancomycin include peripheral edema, fatigue, headache, diarrhea, flatulence, vomiting, back pain, urinary tract infection, and fever. Reports exist of rare cases of increased serum creatinine, vancomyosin flushing syndrome, interstitial nephritis, nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, thrombocytopenia, and vasculitis using oral vancomycin.

The coadministration of other medications, along with vancomycin, may increase the risk of adverse effects and toxicity. Therefore, dosing adjustments, additional monitoring, and consideration of alternative treatment should merit attention when combining vancomycin with certain medications. Caution is necessary when administering vancomycin with other nephrotoxic agents such as aminoglycosides, amphotericin products, and intravenous contrast. Diluted vancomycin hydrochloride should be administered before any intravenous anesthetic agents to reduce the risk of infusion-related adverse reactions.

LD50: 5000 mg/kg (Oral, Mouse) (A308) LD50: 319 mg/kg (Intravenous, Rat) (A308) LD50: 400 mg/kg (Intravenous, Mouse) (A308)

Supportive care is advised, with maintenance of glomerular filtration. Vancomycin is poorly removed by dialysis. (L1712)

Concomitant use of vancomycin and anesthetic agents has been associated with anaphylactoid reactions and an increased frequency of infusion reactions (e.g., hypotension, flushing, erythema, urticaria, pruritus). Erythema and histamine-like flushing has occurred in pediatric patients receiving vancomycin and anesthetic agents concomitantly. The risk of infusion-related adverse effects may be minimized if vancomycin is given as a 1-hour IV infusion prior to induction of anesthesia.

In vitro, the antibacterial effects of vancomycin and aminoglycosides are synergistic against many strains of Staphylococcus aureus, nonenterococcal group D streptococci (Streptococcus bovis), enterococci (Enterococcus faecalis), and viridans streptococci. However, concomitant use of vancomycin and aminoglycosides is associated with an increased risk of ototoxicity and/or nephrotoxicity.

Because of the possibility of additive toxicities, the concurrent or sequential systemic or topical use of other ototoxic and/or nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, bacitracin, cisplatin, colistin, polymyxin B) and vancomycin requires careful serial monitoring of renal and auditory function. These drugs should be used with caution in patients receiving vancomycin therapy.

Renal failure developed after a prolonged course of vancomycin therapy in 2 patients who were receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate as part of an antiretroviral regimen. Tenofovir has been implicated in the development of Fanconi syndrome and renal insufficiency because of its effects on the proximal renal tubule. Vancomycin nephrotoxicity is infrequent but may result from coadministration with a nephrotoxic agent. Clinicians should be aware that tenofovir may raise the risk of renal failure during prolonged administration of vancomycin.

For more Interactions (Complete) data for Vancomycin (6 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

Supportive care is advised, with maintenance of glomerular filtration. Vancomycin is poorly removed by dialysis. Hemofiltration and hemoperfusion with polysulfone resin have been reported to result in increased vancomycin clearance.

Decontamination: Administer activated charcoal orally if conditions are appropriate. Gastric lavage is not necessary after small to moderate ingestions if activated charcoal can be given promptly. /Antibacterial agents/

Emergency and supportive measures: Maintain an open airway and assist ventilation if necessary. Treat coma, seizures, hypotension, anaphylaxis, and hemolysis if they occur. Replace fluid losses resulting from gastroenteritis with intravenous crystalloids. ... /Antibacterial agents/

Enhanced elimination: Most antibiotics are excreted unchanged in the urine, so maintenance of adequate urine flow is important. The role of forced diuresis in unclear. Hemodialysis is not usually indicated, except perhaps in patients with renal dysfunction and a high level of a toxic agent. /Antibacterial agents/

For more Antidote and Emergency Treatment (Complete) data for Vancomycin (7 total), please visit the HSDB record page.

Antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis, caused by toxin-producing clostridia (e.g., C. difficile), has been reported with the use of nearly all anti-infectives, including IV vancomycin, and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients who present with diarrhea subsequent to administration of anti-infectives. Pseudomembranous colitis may occur during or following discontinuance of anti-infective therapy and ranges in severity from mild to life-threatening. Mild cases of colitis may respond to discontinuance of the drug alone, but diagnosis and management of moderate to severe cases should include appropriate bacteriologic studies and treatment with fluid, electrolyte, and protein supplementation as indicated. If colitis is moderate to severe and is not relieved by discontinuance of the drug, appropriate anti-infective therapy (e.g., metronidazole) should be administered. Nausea also has been reported in patients receiving vancomycin therapy.

Urticaria, exfoliative dermatitis, macular rashes, eosinophilia, vasculitis, a shock-like state, transient anaphylaxis, and, occasionally, vascular collapse have been reported in patients receiving vancomycin. The drug also has been associated with Stevens-Johnson syndrome in at least one patient.

/CASE REPORTS/ A 60-year-old man with a history of hypertension, congestive heart failure and dyslipidemia was admitted for a right shoulder rotator cuff tear. He underwent right-shoulder arthroscopy and rotator cuff repair. About three weeks later, he developed pain, swelling and purulent drainage from his right shoulder. Arthroscopic irrigation and drainage was then performed. Intraoperative fluid revealed the presence of Methicillin susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-sensitive Enterococcus spp. and Serratia marcescens. The patient had no known allergies. After reviewing his antimicrobial susceptibility, he was started on vancomycin 1500 mg intravenously every 12 hours (to treat both Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus spp) and ciprofloxacin 750 mgs by oral induction every 12 hours. The patient's condition improved following antibiotic treatment. He was discharged and allowed to go home on IV vancomycin and oral ciprofloxacin. The patient's platelet count on the day of starting vancomycin therapy was 253 x 10(3)/cu mm. At weeks one, two and three, the counts were 231 x 10(3)/cu mm, 272 x 10(3)/mm and 6 x 103/cu mm, respectively. The patient was admitted for further work-up of the thrombocytopenia. He was later shown to have vancomycin-induced platelet-reactive antibodies, causing significant thrombocytopenia, and then reversal after his vancomycin medication was discontinued. Thrombocytopenia is a potentially life-threatening condition. Vancomycin is often clinically overlooked as a cause of thrombocytopenia, especially in a scenario of sepsis or when there is use of heparin. Simple laboratory testing with drug-dependent antibodies can be helpful in identifying vancomycin as a cause of thrombocytopenia.

/CASE REPORTS/ A 70-year-old man receiving vancomycin for a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus abscess developed a drug-induced hypersensitivity reaction with rash, eosinophilia, and acute renal failure requiring dialysis. Renal biopsy revealed diffuse and marked interstitial and tubular infiltration by mononuclear cells and eosinophils; acute tubulointerstitial nephritis was diagnosed. The rash progressed to erythema multiforme major after rechallenge with vancomycin in the setting of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus peritoneal catheter-related peritonitis and then to fatal toxic epidermal necrolysis in the setting of steroid taper and persistent serum vancomycin levels. This case further implicates vancomycin as a drug that infrequently can cause severe acute tubulointerstitial nephritis and exfoliative dermatitis. When a renally excreted drug such as vancomycin is administered, serum drug levels should be serially monitored and high-dosage steroids be maintained or tapered slowly until serum drug levels become undetectable.

/CASE REPORTS/ Disseminated rash and pruritus are described in an 82-year-old woman with chronic renal failure following administration of oral vancomycin hydrochloride 125 mg q6h for the treatment of Clostridium difficile colitis. Renal function was estimated to be 0.27 mL/s based on a serum creatinine of 177 mumol/L. After eight days of therapy, she developed a slightly raised maculopapular rash on her legs and torso, which spread to her abdomen and arms with continued treatment. Vancomycin was discontinued and the patient was treated symptomatically. The rash cleared and did not recur. Rechallenge with vancomycin was not initiated. No other changes in medications or initiations of new medications occurred during the time of treatment with vancomycin. The patient denied any previous immunologically mediated reactions to medications. Maculopapular rash is rare secondary to vancomycin administration, particularly after oral administration. Although clinically significant serum concentrations can be obtained in patients treated with oral vancomycin who have concomitant C. difficile colitis and renal failure, there has not been a clear correlation between these concentrations and any reported adverse sequelae. This case supports the possible occurrence of a true allergic reaction secondary to low-dose oral vancomycin administration.

/GENOTOXICITY/ Vancomycin was not mutagenic in vitro in the mouse lymphoma forward mutation assay or the primary rat hepatocyte unscheduled DNA synthesis assay or in vivo in the Chinese hamster sister chromatid exchange assay or the mouse micronucleus assay.

/OTHER TOXICITY INFORMATION/ The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP) activity in vancomycin-induced renal injury and to determine whether 1,5-isoquinelinediol (ISO), a PARP inhibitor agent, could be offered as an alternative therapy in VCM-induced renal impairment. Rats were divided into four groups as follows: (i) control (Group 1); (ii) vancomycin-treated (Group 2); (iii) vancomycin plus ISO-treated (Group 3); and (iv) ISO-treated (Group 4). vancomycin (200mg/kg, i.p., twice daily) was administered to Groups 2 and 3 for 7 days. ISO (3mg/kg/day, i.p.) treatment was started 24h before the first administration of vancomycin and continued for 8 days. After the 14th vancomycin injection, the animals were placed in metabolic cages to collect urine samples. All the rats were sacrificed by decapitation, blood samples were taken in tubes and kidneys were excised immediately. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and plasma creatinine, and urinary N-acetyl-beta-d-glucosaminidase (NAG, a marker of renal tubular injury) were used as markers of vancomycin-induced renal injury in rats. Light microscopy was used to evaluate semi-quantitative analysis of the kidney sections. Poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR, the product of activated PARP) and PARP-1 expressions in renal tissues were demonstrated by immunohistochemistry and Western blot. vancomycin administration increased BUN levels from 8.07+/-0.75 mg/dL to 53.87+/-10.11 mg/dL. The plasma creatinine levels were 0.8+/-0.04 mg/dL and 3.38+/-0.51 mg/dL for the control and vancomycin-treated groups, respectively. Also, urinary excretion of NAG was increased after vancomycin injection. Besides, there was a significant dilatation of the renal tubules, eosinophilic casts within some tubules, desquamation and vacuolization of renal tubule epithelium, and interstitial tissue inflammation in vancomycin-treated rats. In vancomycin-treated rats, both PAR and PARP-1 expressions were increased in renal tubular cells. ISO treatment attenuated vancomycin-induced renal injury, as indicated by BUN and plasma creatinine levels, urinary NAG excretion, and renal histology. PARP inhibitor treatment also decreased PAR and PARP-1 protein expressions similar to that of controls. Herewith, the overactivation of the PARP pathway may have a role in vancomycin-induced renal impairment and pharmacological inhibition of this pathway might be an effective intervention to prevent vancomycin-induced acute renal injury.

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Record Description

Vancomycin is a complex glycopeptide from Streptomyces orientalis. It inhibits a specific step in the synthesis of the peptidoglycan layer in the Gram-positive bacteria Staphylococcus aureus and Clostridium difficile. It has a role as an antimicrobial agent, an antibacterial drug and a bacterial metabolite. It is functionally related to a vancomycin aglycone. It is a conjugate base of a vancomycin(1+).

Antibacterial obtained from Streptomyces orientalis. It is a glycopeptide related to ristocetin that inhibits bacterial cell wall assembly and is toxic to kidneys and the inner ear. As of January 29 2018, CutisPharma's Firvanq is the only FDA approved vancomycin oral liquid treatment option available for the the treatment of Clostridium difficile associated diarrhea and enterocolitis caused by Staphylococcus aureus, including methicillin-resistant strains [LP1196]. Such an oral liquid formulation is expected to make Clostridium difficile associated diarrhea therapy more accessible in comparison to previously available specialty compounding products [LP1196].

vancomycin has been reported in Trichoderma virens, Ascochyta medicaginicola, and other organisms with data available.

Vancomycin is a branched tricyclic glycosylated peptide with bactericidal activity against most organisms and bacteriostatic effect on enterococci. At a site different from that of penicillins and cephalosporins, vancomycin binds tightly to the D-alanyl-D-alanine portion of cell wall precursors, thereby interfering with bacterial cell wall synthesis. This leads to activation of bacterial autolysins that destroy the cell wall by lysis. Vancomycin may also alter the permeability of bacterial cytoplasmic membranes and may selectively inhibit RNA synthesis.

Glycopeptide Antibiotic is one of a class of antibiotics originally isolated from plant and soil bacteria with structures containing either a glycosylated cyclic or polycyclic nonribosomal peptide. These antibiotics inhibit the cell wall structure of susceptible organisms (principally Gram-positive cocci) by inhibiting peptidoglycan synthesis. First-generation glycopeptide antibiotics include vancomycin, teicoplanin, and ramoplanin; second-generation semi-synthetic glycopeptide antibiotics include oritavancin, dalbavancin, and telavancin.

Vancomycin is only found in individuals that have used or taken this drug. It is an antibacterial obtained from Streptomyces orientalis. It is a glycopeptide related to ristocetin that inhibits bacterial cell wall assembly and is toxic to kidneys and the inner ear. [PubChem]The bactericidal action of vancomycin results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis. Specifically, vancomycin prevents incorporation of N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM)- and N-acetylglucosamine (NAG)-peptide subunits from being incorporated into the peptidoglycan matrix; which forms the major structural component of Gram-positive cell walls. The large hydrophilic molecule is able to form hydrogen bond interactions with the terminal D-alanyl-D-alanine moieties of the NAM/NAG-peptides. Normally this is a five-point interaction. This binding of vancomycin to the D-Ala-D-Ala prevents the incorporation of the NAM/NAG-peptide subunits into the peptidoglycan matrix. In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis. There is no cross-resistance between vancomycin and other antibiotics. Vancomycin is not active in vitro against gram-negative bacilli, mycobacteria, or fungi.

Antibacterial obtained from Streptomyces orientalis. It is a glycopeptide related to RISTOCETIN that inhibits bacterial cell wall assembly and is toxic to kidneys and the inner ear.

<<<PAGE 11>>>
GHS Classification

H334 (95.8%): May cause allergy or asthma symptoms or breathing difficulties if inhaled [Danger Sensitization, respiratory]

P233, P260, P271, P284, P304+P340, P342+P316, P403, and P501 (click each P-code to see the statement)

Aggregated GHS information provided per 72 reports by companies from 6 notifications to the ECHA C&L Inventory.

Information may vary between notifications depending on impurities, additives, and other factors. The percentage value in parenthesis indicates the notified classification ratio from companies that provide hazard codes. Only hazard codes with percentage values above 10% are shown. For more detailed information, please visit ECHA C&L website.
